
www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Advance Praise for Search Patterns

“Search Patterns is a playful guide to the practical concerns of search interface design. It 
contains a bonanza of screenshots and illustrations that capture the best of today’s design 
practices and presents a fresh perspective on the broader role of search and discovery.”

—Marti Hearst
Professor, UC Berkeley, and author, Search User Interfaces

“It’s not often I come across a book that asks profound questions about a fundamental 
human activity, and then proceeds to answer those questions with practical observations 
and suggestions. Search Patterns is an expedition into the heart of the Web and human 
cognition, and for me it was a delightful journey that delivered scores of insights.”

—Dave Gray
Founder and chairman, XPLANE

“Search is swiftly transforming everything we know, yet people don’t understand how 
mavens design search: by stacking breadcrumbs, scenting widgets, and keeping eyeballs 
on the engine. I urge you to put your eyeballs on this unique and important book.”

—Bruce Sterling
Writer, futurist, and cofounder, The Electronic Frontier Foundation

“As one who searches a lot (and often ends up frustrated), I found Search Patterns to be 
a revelation.”

—Nigel Holmes
Designer, theorist, and principal, Explanation Graphics

“Search Patterns is a fabulous must-have book! Inside, you’ll learn the whys and wheres of 
practically every modern search design trick and technique.”

—Jared Spool
CEO and founder, User Interface Engineering

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Search Patterns

Peter Morville and Jeffery Callender

Beijing · Cambridge · Farnham · Köln · Sebastopol · Taipei · Tokyo

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Search Patterns
by Peter Morville and Jeffery Callender

Copyright © 2010 Peter Morville and Jeff Callender. All rights reserved.
Printed in Canada.

Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472.

O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use. Online editions 
are also available for most titles (http://my.safaribooksonline.com). For more information, contact our 
corporate/institutional sales department: (800) 998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.

Editor: Simon St.Laurent
Production Editor: Rachel Monaghan
Copyeditor: Amy Thomson
Proofreader: Rachel Monaghan

Indexer: Julie Hawks
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Interior Designer: Ron Bilodeau
Illustrators: Jeff Callender and Nellie McKesson

Printing History: 
January 2010: First Edition.

Nutshell Handbook, the Nutshell Handbook logo, and the O’Reilly logo are registered trademarks of 
O’Reilly Media, Inc. Search Patterns, the image of a white-barred charaxes, and related trade dress are 
trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc. 

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed 
as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and O’Reilly Media, Inc. was aware of a 
trademark claim, the designations have been printed in caps or initial caps. 

While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher and authors 
assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the informa-
tion contained herein.

ISBN: 978-0-596-80227-1
[TI]

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Contents

Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix

Chapter 1 Pattern Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Understanding Search 3

The Box 3

The Goal 6

The Engine 11

The Discovery of Color 13

Elephant in the Room 17

A Mapmaker’s Manifesto 20

Apophenia Redux 21

Chapter 2 The Anatomy of Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Users 26

Interface 29

Engine 33

Content 36

Creators 39

Context 41

Portal 44

Search 45

Objects 46

All Together Now 48

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Contentsvi

Chapter 3 Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Patterns of Behavior 52

Elements of Interaction 62

Principles of Design 67

Incremental Construction 68

Progressive Disclosure 69

Immediate Response 71

Alternate Views 72

Predictability 74

Recognition Over Recall 75

Minimal Disruption 77

Direct Manipulation 78

Context of Use 80

Chapter 4 Design Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Autocomplete 82

Best First 86

Federated Search 91

Faceted Navigation 95

Advanced Search 102

Personalization 105

Pagination 110

Structured Results 117

Actionable Results 120

Unified Discovery 125

The End of the Beginning 130

Chapter 5 Engines of Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
Category 132

Topic 139

Format 141

Audience 145

Platform 147

Mode 151

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Contents vii

Chapter 6 Tangible Futures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
Methods and Deliverables 156

Search Scenarios 158

Sensorium 158

Semantic Singularity 160

Searchvalence 164

Flock 166

Experience Discovery 168

Recommended Reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173

Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Preface

Hello! I’m Jeff. I’m 
a graphic designer 
and visual thinker.

This is a book about the 
design of user 
interfaces for search 
and discovery.

It covers all the bases 
from precision, recall, 
and relevance to 
autosuggest and 
faceted navigation.

It’s also a book about 
the future that asks 
how visualization, 
artificial intelligence, 
augmented reality, and 
multisensory search 
might shape what we 
find, learn, and believe.

And I’m Peter. 
I’m an 
information 
architect and 
findability 
fanatic. 

I’m also the 
word guy. 
You’ll be 
hearing a 
lot from me.

Most importantly, this is a book about 
tearing down walls. To make search 
better, we must collaborate
across 
disciplines, 
and we must 
break through 
barriers in 
our minds, so 
we are more 
open to 
imagination, 
innovation, 
and inspiration.

We wrote this book for 
designers, information 
architects, students, 
entrepreneurs, and 
anyone who cares about 
the future of search.

We’ve put 
together a 
slideshow to 
explain its 
organization. 

Pos
ter 

desi
gned

 by

Joh
n Va

n Ha
mme

rsve
ld, 

1964

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Prefacex

Plus, I’d like to 
thank my wife Lelia. 
You are the wind 
beneath my wings! 

We hope to see you later at
http://searchpatterns.org

Ok. So enough with the 
PowerPoint! Before we 
begin, we’d like to take 
a moment to thank our 
colleagues at 
Q LTD  and our clients 
all over the world.
We’re also indebted to 
our team of expert 
technical reviewers:

Brynn Evans
Chris Farnum
Daniel Tunkelang
Keith Instone
Luke Wroblewski

Thanks!

And, I’d like to thank Susan, 
Claire, Claudia, and Knowsy 
for gracing my life with color.

Now, let’s 
get to work 
and tear 
down those 
walls!

Chapter 1

Pattern Recognition

 Defines search
 Explains why it ’ s important
 And why it ’ s so difficult

Chapter 2

The Anatomy of Search

 Describes the users, interface, 
engine, content, and creators

 Explores broader contexts of 
knowledge management and 
information architecture

Chapter 3

Behavior

 Explains user psychology and 
classic patterns of behavior
 Introduces the elements and 
principles of interaction design

Chapter 4

Design Patterns

 Illustrates the design patterns
 Includes tons of examples, 
especially web and mobile

Chapter 5

Engines of Discovery

 Covers browsing, serendipity, 
discovery, and answer engines

 Even more interfaces, including 
kiosk and interactive TV

Chapter 6

Tangible Futures

 Methods and deliverables
 Semantic webs, social search, 
personalization, and beyond 

 Futuristic search scenarios

 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Pattern Recognition

“ 	The	future	isn’t	just	unwritten—it’s	unsearched.?”—Bruce Sterling
In astronomy, averted vision is the art of seeing distant objects by looking to their periphery. 
It works by shifting responsibility from cones, which sense color and fine detail, to rods, 
which detect motion and help us to juggle, play chess, and see in the dark. This form of 
peripheral vision can be practiced. Observers often report a gain of three to four magni-
tudes. It’s a powerful reminder that sometimes we must look away to see.

This book will test our ability to juggle multiple visions of search and discovery. We will 
look to the center by describing a pattern language for search that explains user psy-
chology and behavior, embraces emerging technologies and rich interaction models, 
and illustrates repeatable solutions to common problems. We will explore the edges by 
studying cool tools that help users ask, browse, learn, share, visualize, and understand. 

This juggling act is necessary if we are to pursue both incremental improvement and 
radical innovation. In today’s world of intense competition and rapid change, both are 
essential. Search applications demand an obsessive attention to detail. Simple, fast, 
and relevant don’t come easy. Success requires extraordinary focus in research, design, and 
engineering, yet you can’t test and tweak your way from Google to Twitter. Time and again, 
the future of search is invented beyond the borders of its category.

And, search has a future. Search is not a solved problem. Indeed, search is a wicked 
problem of terrific consequence. As the choice of first resort for many users and tasks, 
search is a defining element of the user experience. It changes the way we find every-
thing from answers, articles, and advertising to products, people, and places. It shapes 
how we learn and what we believe. It informs and influences our decisions, and it flows 
into every nook and cranny. Search thrives within and across myriad contexts and chan-
nels. Web, e-commerce, enterprise, desktop, mobile, social, and real time are just a few 
of its classifications. Search is among the biggest, baddest, most disruptive innovations 
around. It’s a source of entrepreneurial insight, competitive advantage, and impossible 
wealth.

Unfortunately, it’s also the source of endless frustration. Search is the worst usability 
problem on the Web. It’s held that title for many years. We find too many results or too 
few, and most regular folks don’t know where to search, or how. From enterprise to 
e-commerce, user needs and business goals are obstructed by failures in  findability. 

1

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 1: Pattern Recognition2

And the news doesn’t improve when you change the channel. Mobile search is a mess, 
kiosks are worse, and interactive television remains the lonely domain of the early 
adopter. Your average couch potato isn’t quite ready to trade his remote control for a 
search box.

Most of the complaints 
we get are due to the way 
users search. they use 
the wrong keywords.

Yeah. T
hat's R

ight. It
's 

those 
Stupid 

Users!

Figure 1-1. A manager explains why search stinks

Of course, pundits claim we’ll solve search soon with artificial intelligence, information 
visualization, personalization, and the Semantic Web, but this fabled future never arrives. 
Search remains as noisy and irregular as language and communication. Vendors hawk 
their wares to IT executives who understand business and technology but turn a blind 
eye to user experience. Content stakeholders perfect their publishing workflow only to 
bury their crown jewels behind firewalls and within tightly controlled information silos. 
Design teams work hard to make search simple, but lack the skills and tools to ensure 
relevance and speed. Once in a while, the stars do align and real solutions emerge, but 
in most organizations and applications today, bad search remains an inconvenient truth.

And even when search works well, it can always be improved. Even Google is only good 
enough until something better comes along. In search, innovation is a forced move. 
It’s not easy, but it’s not impossible. It is important. And that is the reason for this book. 
We want to make search better. Or, to be more precise, we want to inspire you to make 
search better. But first, we had better define what it is that we seek to improve.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Understanding Search 3

UnDERSTAnDIng SEARCH
The way we define a problem or frame a question shapes how we and our colleagues 
understand, answer, and act. An overly narrow formulation leads to tunnel vision, and 
we’re oblivious to all but the obvious. But stray too far from the center, and we lose our 
focus while trying to boil the ocean. The best strategy is to avert and revert, juggling 
ideas, patterns, gaps, and oddballs in the periphery without losing sight of the goal.

THE Box
In search, the first ball in the air is a box. It’s the iconic symbol of search and a great place 
to start. Enter a keyword or two, and you’re good to go. 

Figure 1-2. The iconic search box

The box comes in all colors, shapes, and sizes. It sports a variety of buttons and labels. 
It appears as a feature of sites, browsers, applications, and operating systems, and it’s 
found across channels and within all forms of interactive media. The box has grown so 
familiar it now lives in our heads like Plato’s perfect circle. We recognize it as a box, even 
when it’s not.

Figure 1-3. When is a box not a box?

Of course, each box has its secrets. How can I search? What’s being searched? Its affor-
dance tells us little about language and scope. Are we querying the text of Twitter or the 
metadata of music? And can we simply enter keywords or must we speak Boolean? The 
answers are revealed by context and experience. On Flickr, we know we seek images, 
but we must learn how and why to query by tag and filter by interestingness.

Figure 1-4. There are many dialects in the language of search

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 1: Pattern Recognition4

Similarly, the behavior of each box is revealed only by interaction (or word of mouth). As 
we begin to type, autocomplete offers to save time and typos, while autosuggest serves 
up Best Bets and related topics. Or, we can highlight a phrase in Firefox, drag and drop it 
into the search bar, and query a custom search engine using only our mouse. 

Only one letter in the box and 
Apple’s autosuggest is already 
serving up search results.

This elegant design pattern saves 
time and typos, while opening the 
door to marketing.

Figure 1-5. Apple’s colorful version of autosuggest

iPhone users soon learn the rhythm of tap and type, understanding that the box has be-
come subject to touch. Or we simply raise our phones to our ears and speak our search, 
relying on Google Mobile to derive what we want from who we are, where we stand, 
and what we say. No buttons. No typing. No clicks. Our identities, locations, and voices 
form a new kind of query that has us searching (and thinking) outside the box.

www.it-ebooks.info

v@v
Text Box
Download at WoweBook.com

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Understanding Search 5

Google uses the iPhone’s onboard 
accelerometer to support gestural 
interaction.

So, we can lift the phone to our 
ears and speak a search.

Like placing your hands under a 
tap to turn on the water, this is the 
type of smart design that 
“dissolves in behavior.”

Figure 1-6. Google Mobile with Voice Search on the iPhone

Further reflection is inspired by the interplay between input and output. Often, the results 
are links and snippets, but sometimes they are answers to questions. If you ask nicely, 
Google will reply with weather forecasts, stock quotes, traffic maps, and sports scores. 

Figure 1-7. Google presents structured results for special query types

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 1: Pattern Recognition6

You can track packages, perform calculations, and visualize data. This is where things 
get interesting. The box isn’t limited to search—it’s also a command-line interface that 
affords power and flexibility to users in the know. It’s a calculator. It’s a communicator. 
It’s a universal remote control. The box is a boundary object that links design, engineer-
ing, and marketing. We must work together to see what it can do.

Figure 1-8. The thinking box

The only limit is ourselves. In the prophetic words of William Gibson, “The box was a 
universe, a poem, frozen on the boundaries of human experience.”1

THE goAl
Yet, if we keep our eyes on the box, we may lose sight of the goal. After all, search is first 
and foremost about findability. We search to find objects and answers. We seek to find 
(and re-find) pages, people, places, products, and facts. The archetypal search is a quick 
lookup that leads from query to results to found object. It serves as a navigation short-
cut that speeds our way from here to there. Search is the means to an end.

1 Count Zero, William Gibson (Ace).

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Understanding Search 7

ResultResultsQuery

Search

Figure 1-9. We search to find results

Of course, search isn’t the only way we find. We often ask family, friends, and colleagues. 
Where are my keys? What’s the best way to the market? What’s that URL? Sometimes we 
ask professionals. Is there a great vegetarian restaurant near the hotel? Can you help me 
find a good book about global warming? What’s this fungus on my foot?

Ask

Social NetworkQuestion

Figure 1-10. We ask to find answers

Our strategies for asking are often situated by time and place. There are questions at 
dinner and questions for the doctor. Yet, we increasingly displace these questions by 
searching for answers in a box. In fact, the line between ask and search is fuzzy, defined 
mostly by distinctions of syntax and semantics. A query is simply a question without the 
ornament of natural language. When we ask and search, we seek to find. That is the goal.

Sometimes we don’t need to ask; the answers find us. In our everyday experience, we 
are inundated by information. News, spam, facts, and gossip flow into our attention 
through a mesh of channels, networks, subscriptions, and feeds. Our relationships, 
memberships, identity, and location form an ongoing query against a universal dataset.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 1: Pattern Recognition8

Filter

FeedsLens

Figure 1-11. We use filters so the right stuff finds us

We rely on people, tools, algorithms, and impatience as filters. Still, junk gets in. On the 
other hand, we often find what we need without leaving the house or lifting a finger.

We also browse to find. We wander aisles, scan shelves, sort papers, open folders, click 
links, flick photos, and shuffle songs. This takes time and invites serendipity. We never 
know what we may stumble upon. Browsing evokes a sense of place. There are trails, 
edges, signs, maps, and landmarks that test our wayfinding skills. As a spatial experi-
ence, browsing is unique, and yet many of its most worn paths lead directly to and from 
search.

Browse

Figure 1-12. Browsing involves wandering and wayfinding

In fact, we move fluidly between modes of ask, browse, filter, and search without noting 
the shift. We scan feeds, ask questions, browse answers, and search again. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Understanding Search 9

Find

Ask

Filter

Query

Search Browse

Results

Figure 1-13. We flow between modes

All these modes should be on the table when designing for findability. Each is but one 
tactic in support of a goal. Rather than prescribing tools and tasks, we must aim for 
(and beyond) the searchers’ intent. What do they want? What do they need? But, before 
accepting our mission, it’s worth challenging the objective, because search isn’t only 
about finding.

As any concierge or librarian will avow, their jobs aren’t simply to answer questions. 
They first conduct exploratory conversations or reference interviews to better under-
stand what we want and why. A hotel guest who asks for a local area map may be on 
her way to a restaurant that closed last month. The concierge can identify a suitable 
alternative and call ahead for reservations. A library patron who wants an old issue of 
Consumer Reports may be buying a new car, and he may not know the library provides 
access to an online database of reviews and ratings. The librarian can help jumpstart his 
search. Oftentimes, due to a gap in knowledge or language, the searcher isn’t able to 
ask the right question. 

That’s why search at its best is a conversation. It’s an iterative, interactive process where 
we find we learn. The answer changes the question. The process moves the goal. Search 
has the power to suggest, define, refine, cross-sell, upsell, relate, and educate. In fact, 
search is already among the most influential ways we learn. It’s trusted and relied upon 
by millions of people a day. Search is the world’s most popular teacher. As designers, 
we must expand our vision beyond finding to incorporate learning. And we can’t stop 
there.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 1: Pattern Recognition10

Learn

Document
Query

Results

Figure 1-14. In search, we find we learn

Search also has the ability to enhance understanding. A search engine results page 
(SERP) is a custom map that’s built in response to a query. It’s how we see what we’ve 
found. This potential is best realized in faceted search, where the selective presentation 
of metadata fields and values serves as a table of contents to the result set. But it’s also 
evident in the way Google surfaces diverse content types and related queries. And we’re 
finally starting to see real progress at the intersection of information visualization and 
search, where rich results can provoke exploration, insight, and understanding.

Understand

MapQuery

Figure 1-15. Search helps us understand what we’ve found

Of course, these quests to find, learn, and understand rarely occur in isolation. Search 
isn’t always a solo sport. We search on behalf of other people. We search with other 
people. We crowdsearch with Twitter and Mechanical Turk, distributing our queries (as 
whispers or shouts) to a networked community of searchers and solvers. Search can be 
a social experience in which we share goals, queries, and results. As designers, we must 
strive to support collaborative discovery. We must help people to search together.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Understanding Search 11

Share

ResultQuery

Social Network

Results

Figure 1-16. We often search together

The goals of users may warrant other acts. While print, save, and share are most com-
mon, a variety of tasks may be integral to the process. Increasingly, on result pages, we 
can play music, watch videos, buy products, update calendars, and call contacts. 

Act

Action

ResultQuery Results

Figure 1-17. Users deserve actionable results

The promise is particularly rich in mobile, but each channel offers unique possibilities for 
integrating useful features into actionable results. Search is not just about findability. We 
search to learn, understand, share, and act. As designers, when we focus on goals, the 
challenge becomes exhilarating (and scary), because the end of search is a moving target.

THE EngInE
A more traditional way to define search is by its software. Buy the engine, then figure out 
what it’s good for. This can put search in a straightjacket. How often have we been told 
the engine can’t handle that content type or index multiple sites or rank by popularity 
or respond in less than a lifetime? So search fails because all too often, if it’s not easy, 
it’s not possible. When technology precedes requirements, the user experience suffers.

This approach also leads to solutions in search of problems. Remember when relevance 
scores were all the rage? Your first result is 78% relevant. What the heck did that mean? 
Why did companies clutter their results with useless trivia? Because it was a default. The 
engine made it easy. Similarly, most natural-language interfaces, flashy result visualiza-
tions, and autocategorizers are simply high-tech hammers in search of nails.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 1: Pattern Recognition12

Then again, hammers do have their uses. A tool in the hand is worth two in the box. 
Hammers extend our reach and amplify force. They push buttons and break down 
doors. Similarly, engines can do more than search. For instance, there’s an engine called 
Evri, shown in Figure 1-18, that appears in the Washington Post’s website. At the end of 
each article, readers can learn more about relevant people, organizations, and topics. 

Evri uses a map of people,  places, 
and things to connect users with 
related objects.

While there’s an engine behind 
Evri, their motto is:

search less. understand more.

Figure 1-18. Evri’s suggestions for an iPhone article

Using Evri, readers don’t search, they simply follow a link. But search is the engine that 
powers this experience. The same is true on e-commerce sites where most links are 
queries against the product catalog and the analytics database. Even when we browse, 
we search. 

This reframing of search has produced a whole new generation of discovery tools and 
recommender systems. Last.fm, Pandora, Ambiently, and StumbleUpon are search with-
out the box. We click, jump, and vote. Keywords are displaced by hearts and thumbs.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


The Discovery of Color 13

We also open the door to innovation by sharing the search API. The New York Times, 
for instance, allows third parties to create tools for exploring its database. With over 13 
million articles, 35 fields per article, and support for faceted search, this is an amazing 
playground for developers to build anything from custom link lists and remote search 
widgets to complex visualizations. New applications can expand their audience and 
clever mashups can expand their minds by showing how news can be reimagined. 

In search, innovation through collaboration is smart strategy. Emerging technologies 
from disparate categories can suddenly inject search with new possibility. For instance, 
in the subset of machine learning known as pattern recognition, our devices are learn-
ing to recognize and analyze faces, footfalls, gunshots, speech, text, images, and data. 
Sensors and algorithms combine to detect threats, track trends, and identify anomalies. 
And software agents tell us what topics to search. It’s truly difficult for us humans to 
stay current, so we need to keep many eyeballs on the engine without losing sight of 
the goal.

THE DISCovERy oF ColoR
The spectral colors of red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet are produced 
by light of a single wavelength, and are all visible to the human eye, except for indigo, 
which most people can’t distinguish. Isaac Newton included indigo so the number of 
colors would match the number of known planets, notes in a major scale, and days in a 
week. Of course, any list of colors is arbitrary in a spectrum of infinite variation. Colors 
are categories we use to explain what we see and, in the case of ultraviolet and infrared, 
what we don’t. We even have imaginary colors like octarine, the eighth color, an elusive 
spectral mix that’s hard to describe and impossible to perceive. That’s the thing about 
color. Try describing a rainbow or a sunset to a blind person or ask a synesthete to tell 
you about the sound of blue or the color of Monday.2 Most of us are unable to fully ac-
cept or appreciate this cross-sensory perception. We have to see to believe.

2 Synesthesia is a neurological phenomenon in which stimulation of one sensory or cognitive pathway leads to auto-
matic, involuntary experiences in a second pathway, as when the hearing of a sound produces the visualization of a 
color. People who report such experiences are known as synesthetes.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 1: Pattern Recognition14

Figure 1-19. Newton’s color wheel, showing the colors correlated with musical notes and symbols for 
the known bodies within the solar system

The same holds true in search. We have a number of well-established categories: web, 
e-commerce, enterprise, desktop, mobile, social, and real time. Within each catego-
ry, we embrace a set of proven technologies, business models, user behaviors, and 
best practices. We are mostly blind to the chaotic yet colorful array of search startups 
and design patterns dancing on the horizon. There are so many possible futures for 
search and discovery, and it’s hard to discern good ideas from bad. In the 1990s, folks 
laughed at a startup named GoTo and the absurd idea of paid search. Meanwhile, 
people raved about PointCast. Push was the next big thing. Until it wasn’t. We’ve made 
many mistakes and it’s tempting to give up. Why engage a future so unevenly distrib-
uted? It’s safe to be a skeptic, so we stay within our category and copy the competi-
tion. We test and refine, we celebrate incremental improvement, and we laugh at the 
latest big idea for reinventing search. “What a joke! That’ll never work.”  Again, we have 
to see to believe.

Inevitably, this insularity leads to a category error. We omit a key feature because “that 
won’t fly in the enterprise.” We miss the next Twitter because “that’s not search.” This 
is why it’s so important to look beyond our borders. The enterprise can learn from 
e-commerce. We must simply adjust for different constraints, metrics, and goals. It’s 
equally vital to reorganize. Like colors, our categories are arbitrary by nature. We orga-
nize to understand, and we must reorganize to see anew.

For instance, there’s clear value in naming the primary colors of search. This classifica-
tion provides a quick way to reference the major categories and key players. It helps us 
explain the market dynamics and business strategies behind divergent search solutions. 
And, as the color wheel illustrates beautifully, it offers a glimpse of the brilliant diversity 
of search.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


The Discovery of Color 15

Figure 1-20. The primary colors of search

This is not a pure organization. On the contrary, it’s a loose grab bag of context, purpose, 
and platform. Yet it still belies the true chaos of the marketplace for discovery. We Yahoo! 
on the iPhone and use Google Desktop to query web history. We search social conversa-
tions threaded over applications, channels, languages, and time zones for embedded 
links that connect to any media. Search won’t fit cleanly on a color wheel. In fact, these 
categories reveal more about the history of search than its future.

Today, search is best imagined as an artist’s palette, as shown in Figure 1-21. The mix-
ing of colors has begun. Lovely hues and shades exist outside the categories. We can 
see them better when we shuffle our ways of organizing. For instance, there are riches 
within the niches of format.

In images, we find the photo facets of Getty, the interestingness of Flickr, and the visual 
recognition of Like.com, which lets us search and shop by color, shape, and pattern. 

In music, Songza turns the results interface into a jukebox, Midomi lets us search by 
singing, and Last.fm spins our personal channel into a melody of social discovery.

In video, Everyzing unlocks the vault with its speech-to-text translation technology, 
while NetFlix, Hulu, and Boxee search together and apart for the future and end of TV.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 1: Pattern Recognition16

Discovery

Real Time

Actionable

E-commerce

Music

Mobile

Social

Television

Web

Multisensory
I/Q

Question 
Answering

Visualization

C ATEGORY

Web

E-commerce

Enterprise

Desktop

Mobile

Social

Real Time

CONTEX T

Intranet

Library

Personal

TOPIC

Health

Travel

Jobs

VER TIC AL

Finance

Education

Government

PL ATFORM

Television

Kiosk

FORMAT

Music

Video

Image

Text

Maps

Spime

OPEN COLORS

Octarine

Figure 1-21. The infinite colors of search

We can also organize by subject and industry, taking a close look at search verticals like 
health, travel, and real estate. Or we can sort by approach, focusing on text analytics, clus-
tering, question answering, personalization, visualization, or rich results. Each organiza-
tional scheme adds combinatorial possibilities to our palette. Desktop search is social and 
personal. It’s not about the desktop. Music is mobile. There’s video in every vertical. The 
potential for cross-fertilization is huge. Diversity is the inexorable result of search.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Elephant in the Room 17

As designers, we can learn from each color and combination. Many ideas work once, or 
never, but there are patterns of behavior and design that bridge contexts. In this book, 
that’s our target: we will aim to explore core concepts and best practices by studying 
examples drawn from within and between contexts. And we will repeatedly try to es-
cape the category. What kinds of information and objects are unsearchable? What, if 
anything, will never be subject to search? What can we learn from asking, browsing, and 
filtering? Where is the boundary between search and unsearch? To think outside the 
box, we will search beyond the periphery. Sometimes we must look away to see.

ElEPHAnT In THE Room
Of course, whether it’s a wretched beggar on the sidewalk or a pink elephant on the din-
ner table, sometimes we look away to ignore. We avoid taboo topics and inconvenient 
truths by focusing on small distractions. It’s a tactic that’s at home in the kitchen and the 
corner office. And it’s often at work in IT, where search is an elephant we prefer to duck.

Let’s face it: search is a wicked problem with no definitive formulation, considerable 
uncertainty, and complex interdependencies. Stakeholders have divergent goals and 
radically different world views. Requirements are incomplete, contradictory, and ever-
changing. Search is both a project and a process. It’s a problem that’s never solved.

And that’s not the half of it. Our organizations are woefully unprepared to tackle search. 
We lack the team and the technology. Unlike Google, most firms aren’t structured to 
manage the high-tech, step-changing, cross-functional, user-centered challenge. There 
are too many hyphens. As a hybrid of engineering, marketing, and design, search cre-
ates too many openings for missing links. As a complex adaptive system that’s sensi-
tive to scale, search is a mystery that morphs over time. Search isn’t just wicked, it’s 
downright dangerous. Why risk your career (and your weekends) on a problem that’s 
so intractable?

Especially when it’s also invisible. That’s right. Search is an elephant that hides in plain 
sight because executives lack the right radar. Many in management don’t realize the 
role search plays in defining the user experience. They fixate on the home page, they 
fuss about look and feel, and they care about the content. They may even fume about 
findability, but they are easily distracted or misled because they really don’t understand 
search. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 1: Pattern Recognition18

Figure 1-22. Ducking the elephant

So, it’s safest to keep search small. Buy a brand, defer to defaults, don’t ask questions, 
maintain plausible deniability, and be ready with a response. The speed is subject to 
security. We had to choose fast or safe. It’s too hard to make it easy. We can’t afford the 
cost. The results are relevant in theory. Our problem is the users. They use the wrong 
keywords. But, it’s not worth much attention, because our users mostly don’t search. 

We underfund and understaff search, and its poverty becomes a self-fulfilling proph-
ecy. In many contexts, expectations have been crushed. Users don’t search now since 
search failed then. Sometimes they browse. Often they bail. They abandon online for 
phone and email. This regress to more costly channels is bad for business. It’s also sad 
for society.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Elephant in the Room 19

The Sadness of Search

Confusion Anger DefeatPessimism

ResultResults

Panic Shame Contempt

Anxiety

Query Results

Figure 1-23. Poor search is bad for business and sad for society

Every increase in search costs diminishes our quality of life. Poor search wastes time like a 
crooked street sign that sends us in the wrong direction. It erodes trust, derails learning, 
and confuses decisions. It makes us blame ourselves. And therein lies the problem. For 
most people, search is sufficiently advanced technology that it’s indistinguishable from 
magic. We don’t know what to expect or who to blame. We certainly can’t see what’s miss-
ing. Our response can be emotional. We suffer. We feel sadness, shame, anger, and disgust. 
Sometimes we soldier on, unhappy but resolute. Often we surrender. We simply fail to 
search. We live uninformed without seeing what we miss, for the cost of the unsearched is 
an unseen drag on commerce and culture, as invisible as it is incalculable.

The Joy of Search

Discovery NirvanaOptimism

ResultQuery

Surprise Pride Love

Curiosity

Understanding

Results Results

Figure 1-24. Search can be a source of information and inspiration

It doesn’t have to be this way. When we design with our users in mind, search can be 
an engine of inspiration and joy. We find what we want. We discover what we need. We 
stimulate our minds and recover our memories. We feel surprise, wonder, amusement, 
and pride. Search is a core life activity that engages both intellect and emotion. It has the 
power to change a life or save a business. For designers, search is a grand challenge, an 
elephant we should not duck. We can succeed at search. We just need courage and vision.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 1: Pattern Recognition20

A mAPmAkER’S mAnIFESTo
In this book, our taste for rhetoric and imagery may run amok. Adding color to the mes-
sage can occasionally obscure its meaning. That is not our intent. So, for the sake of clar-
ity, here are our beliefs and principles in plain language:

1. Search is a problem too big to ignore.

2. Browsing doesn’t scale, even on an iPhone.

3. Size matters. Linear growth compels a step change in design.

4. Simple, fast, and relevant are table stakes.

5. One size won’t fit all. Search must adapt to context.

6. Search is iterative, interactive, social, and multisensory.

7. Increments aren’t enough. Even Google must innovate or die.

8. It’s not just about findability. It’s not just about the Web.

9. The challenge is radically multidisciplinary.

10. We must engage engineers and executives in design.

11. We can learn from the past. Library science is still relevant.

12. We can learn from behavior. Interaction design affords actionable results.

13. We can learn from one user. Analytics is enriched by ethnography.

14. Some patterns, we should study and reuse.

15. Some patterns, we should break like a bad habit.

16. Search is a complex adaptive system.

17. Emergence, cocreation, and self-organization are in play.

18. To discover the seeds of change, go outside.

19. In science, fiction, and search, the map invents the territory.

20. The future isn’t just unwritten—it’s unsearched.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Apophenia Redux 21

OK, so a rhetorical flourish or two infiltrated our manifesto. What can we say? They’re 
sneaky little buggers! But our aim is clear. We are passionate about search. We believe 
it’s far more interesting and important than most people realize. We aspire to get the 
design right and the right design through refinement and reinvention. We don’t have all 
the answers. Neither do you. But as writers and designers, we are inventing the future of 
experience and discovery. We are the mapmakers. Together, we can make search better.

APoPHEnIA REDUx
In Pattern Recognition, William Gibson defined apophenia as “the spontaneous percep-
tion of connections and meaningfulness in unrelated things.”3 It’s an old term, coined by 
a psychologist in 1958, that enjoys new life in our fast, flat world. Apophenia is a type-1 
error, a false positive caused by excess sensitivity. Most neurologists agree this condi-
tion exists in everyone. It’s a natural bias of the human mind. We search for patterns to 
explain and anticipate change. On occasion, we see a new trend. Invariably, we confuse 
signal for noise. Apophenia is a symptom of madness and creativity. When artists, en-
trepreneurs, and autistic savants spot new patterns in music and markets, they walk the 
fine line between crazy and genius. It’s a line we should all walk more.

Of course, there’s value to be had in mining old patterns, as the architect Christopher 
Alexander eloquently intimated in The Timeless Way of Building:

“ 	There	is	one	timeless	way	of	building.?
It	is	thousands	of	years	old,	and	the	same	today	as	it	has	always	been.?	

The	great	traditional	buildings	of	the	past,	the	villages	and	tents	and	temples	in	
which	man	feels	at	home,	have	always	been	made	by	people	who	were	very	close	
to	the	center	of	this	way.?		” 4

In his quest for  “the quality without a name,” Alexander developed a practical way to cat-
alog patterns of behavior and design. His pattern language offered a structured method 
for identifying and illustrating repeatable (optimal) solutions to common problems.

3 Pattern Recognition, William Gibson (Penguin).
4 The Timeless Way of Building, Christopher Alexander (Oxford University Press).

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 1: Pattern Recognition22

Figure 1-25. A pattern language for architecture

This framework has been embraced in a variety of fields from ecology and education to 
engineering and design. Recently, we’ve enjoyed access to pattern libraries that help us 
create more useful, usable, and desirable software and interfaces. Yahoo!, in particular, has 
done a brilliant job of sharing patterns and code with the wider community (Figure 1-26). 

Patterns embed wisdom, yet we should mind whose patterns we trust. Not all are cre-
ated equal. To design well, we must understand how patterns fit together and relate to 
a context of use. A pattern in one scene is a problem in the next. If we aspire to innovate, 
we must dare to break the mold. Nobody said the timeless way was easy.

“ 	We	are	searching	for	some	kind	of	harmony	between	two	intangibles:	a	form	which	we	have	not	yet	designed	and	a	context	which	we	cannot	properly	
describe.?” 5

5 Notes on the Synthesis of Form, Christopher Alexander (Harvard University Press).

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Apophenia Redux 23

Figure 1-26. Yahoo!’s pattern library

In this task, past performance may impede future results. Therein lies the paradox of 
prediction. We must look back to see ahead, but as Mark Twain noted, “History doesn’t 
repeat itself—at best it sometimes rhymes.”  To envision the next stanza, we might take 
a page from e.e. cummings, the mud-luscious poet of unconventional syntax:

“ 	Understand	the	rules.?	Then,	break	them	with	intent.?	”
That’s the problem with the future of search. The prophets don’t understand. Neither 
do the investors, executives, and journalists who swallow their sermons whole. Often, 
they don’t know how search works. They rarely grok the complexity of software devel-
opment, and they certainly don’t understand how user psychology and behavior are 
related to the success or failure of search applications. So, apophenia runs rampant. It’s 
hard to keep track of all the paradigm shifts and Google killers, especially when they 
fail so fast. Ironically, spin notwithstanding, the official future of search—artificial in-
telligence with a dash of information visualization—hasn’t changed in decades. Most 
search startups just add new wrinkles to an old face. We’re stuck on the original Star 
Trek, seeking technological singularity and the agents of tomorrow in a rusty rearview 
mirror. It’s like the signs outside British pubs that promise “Free Beer Tomorrow” forever.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 1: Pattern Recognition24

There is a way to break the stalemate. We can unlock the game of improve versus inno-
vate. We can forsake the tyranny of the OR for the genius of the AND.6 The key is vision. 
We must focus on the fine detail of stable patterns at the center, while keeping an eye on 
emerging technologies at the periphery. We must know what we see and where to look.

Figure 1-27. Drunk under the lamp post

That’s the aim of this book. It’s a lens for refraction and reflection. It’s a microscope, a 
telescope, and a kaleidoscope. By studying patterns and surveying trends, we will learn 
to improve and innovate. And by adding to our tools and palette, we will make search 
more visible and vibrant for ourselves and for those without vision. This book is a practi-
cal guide to the future, a colorful map to frameshift, and a doorstop to boot. We wrote it 
because the box is reshaping the globe right now. It’s a topic both timely and timeless. 
Search is a core life activity, as ancient in its form as the trees and hills, and as our faces 
are. We must discover its patterns and break them with intent. Let’s get cracking!

6 Built to Last, Jim Collins and Jerry Porras (Harper).

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


The Anatomy of Search

“ 	How	can	a	part	know	the	whole??”—Blaise Pascal
In anatomy, we divide to understand. We dissect the whole to study its parts. We iden-
tify internal organs and map their relationships. As a major branch of biology, anatomy 
reflects both the power and the limits of specialization. For we must not allow our fo-
cus on form and structure to distract us from function or blind us to context. Anatomy 
can’t tell us how the mind works. It can’t reveal the sublime experience of vision. And it 
certainly can’t predict the behavior of an ant colony or a stock market. These complex 
adaptive systems exhibit macroscopic properties of self-organization and emergence. 
Not only is the whole greater than the sum of its parts, but it’s also different. It’s a terri-
tory off the map. And yet, our simple models have value, for they offer us a very good 
place to start.

Our map to search features five elements: users, creators, content, engine, and interface. 
Like any map, it hides more than it shows. It’s deceptive by design. It shifts attention 
from software and hardware to the elements of user experience. Our plan is to study 
each element without losing sight of the whole. We must know enough about the tech-
nology to understand what’s difficult and what’s possible. But we need not become 
intimately familiar with load balancing, pattern matching, and latent semantic indexing. 
That’s why we have specialists. Instead, we’ll study the components and context in suf-
ficient detail to inform strategy and design. We’ll survey the terrain in search of the big 
picture. So, let’s start at the very beginning with the users for whom we design.

EngineResults ContentQuery

CreatorsUsers

Interface

Goals
Psychology
Behavior

Interaction
Affordances
Language

Features
Technology
Algorithms

Indexing
Structure
Metadata

Tools
Process
Incentives

Figure 2-1. The anatomy of search

2

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 2: The Anatomy of Search26

USERS
There’s a lot we can learn about our users. Demographics cover income, age, and gen-
der. Psychographics reveal values, attitudes, and lifestyle. Technographics segment user 
populations by their adoption of tools and software. Some of this data is useful for de-
signing better search systems. Much of it is not. It’s all too easy to stuff a treasure chest 
with worthless facts and figures. Organizations do it all the time. The key to profitable 
user research is knowledge. We must know enough to ask the right questions. We must 
understand the basics of user psychology and behavior as they relate to the type of 
system we plan to build. We require a conceptual framework that lets us focus on the 
pivotal questions that make the difference in design. We need a scalpel, not a hatchet.

For instance, we know the paradox of the active user is a constant in search. Most people 
refuse to read the manual, personalize the system, or prepare a strategy before they be-
gin, despite evidence that such initial “presearch” improves overall efficiency. We enter 
two or three keywords and we GO. We’re seduced by the illusion of speed. It’s only when 
we find we’re lost that we check a map or ask for help. Of course, some users love manu-
als, while others must study them in training. But for most users in most contexts, this 
paradox is active. Knowing this helps us to excise unfit questions and designs.

Another timeless topic is the question of precision versus recall. Do our users care more 
about finding only the relevant results or all the relevant results? In search design, the 
two are inversely related. Like kids on a seesaw, when one goes up, the other comes 
down. High precision generally means we miss some of the good stuff, while high recall 
forces us to sift through the good, the bad, and the ugly, except when a better algorithm 
or a richer interaction model lets us “bend the board” by amplifying the signal with-
out adding noise. Either way, it’s worth asking, especially since the answer may signal a 
pivot point where user and business goals diverge. In e-commerce, for example, a user 
may want to find a specific product as quickly as possible, whereas a vendor may allow 
for more noise, hoping that cross-selling will spur an impulse buy. It’s critical to identify 
and manage this predictable source of tension in the user experience. 

We should also consider expertise with respect to search in general and the domain in 
question. Let’s say we’re building a search application for health and medicine. Will most 
users (or our most important users) be familiar with medical terminology? And how 
about their digital literacy? Are they fluent or fumbling? It’s a common mistake to con-
flate these two types of mastery. People assume that good doctors are good searchers, 
but that’s not true at all. Their magic has limits. In most domains, there are wizards and 
muggles who can and can’t search, and each group needs different support. Knowing 
the relative strengths and weaknesses of our target audiences is a key to good design.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Users 27

Relevant Objects

Precision

All Objects

Recall

Typical Tradeoff

Precision

Recall

Precision Recall

Bending the Board

Figure 2-2. The relevance seesaw

Search Exp
ertise

Domain Expertise

I’m totally lost. Help me search.

I’m lost for words. Give me power tools.

Figure 2-3. Expertise types

Type of search is another key variable. There’s a big difference between the simple lookup 
of known-item search and the dynamic learning of exploratory search. Google’s got look-
up down. Fast, simple, relevant. If you know what you want, Google will find it in less than 
a second. It’s so fast, we use it for navigation, running queries even when we know the 
URL. But if you’re unsure what you need, Amazon offers a better model. Faceted naviga-
tion plus tools for recommendation help us learn. Search becomes an iterative, interactive 
experience where what we find changes what we seek. While each type begins in a box, 
the types diverge by process and goal. Many systems must support both. To design well, 
we must think carefully about how and where to strike the right balance.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 2: The Anatomy of Search28

Known-Item Search

Fact Retrieval
Question Answering

Find or refind a fact, document, page, site, 
company, product, person, place, or object.

ResultQuery ResultsQuery

Lookup Learn

Exploratory Search

Knowledge Discovery
Comparison & Analysis

Explore a topic or product category to improve 
understanding and decision quality.

Figure 2-4. Search modes

Of course, we must also consider platform, purpose, and context of use. Are we design-
ing for desktops, laptops, televisions, kiosks, or mobiles in motion? The iPhone’s small 
screen and soft keyboard place new limits on search, especially when it’s jiggling in your 
palm in the back of a taxi cab in downtown Berlin at midnight. On the other hand, its 
multisensory I/O tears down old walls. When we integrate a microphone, speaker, GPS, 
accelerometer, magnetometer, and a multitouch interface, we redefine what’s feasible 
in search. The whole may not recognize the sum of its parts. Design must respond to 
context. That’s why it’s good to ask where your users will be when they need you.

olympics tv schedule GO the black swan GO low cost hotel GO

Desktop at Work Laptop at Home Kiosk in Store Mobile in Taxi

bing google comparison GO

Figure 2-5. Context of use

Finally, we should seek to balance the qualities of the user experience. In mobile, search 
must be useful and usable. Simple, fast, and relevant wins the day. But in music, search 
begets desire. Cover Flow makes it OK to look, while Pandora tempts us to buy. In gov-
ernment, accessible and credible are tops, but in business, search must be found, and 
real results add value to the bottom line. In each context, we must identify which quali-
ties our users and organizations value, and then design with these priorities in mind.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Interface 29

Erasable
How do these qualities interact? 
Which are most and least 
important to search? What have 
we missed? Go ahead. Erase a 
few. Add your own. This is only 
a place to start.

User Experience Honeycomb: Searcher’s Edition

Useful
Is it useful? Is search the right 
solution? Will it help our users 
achieve their goals?  And, given 
the state of technology, should 
we revisit our goals? Can search 
be more?

Usable
Is it easy to use with maximum 
efficiency and minimal error? 
Are there affordances for novice 
and expert searchers? Are there 
gentle slopes to support 
learning? 

Desirable
Is it satisfying to use? Does it 
make people want to search? 
Does it embody the values and 
identity of your brand? Does 
search leverage the power of 
emotional design?

Findable
Can users find your site? Can 
they find their way around your 
site? Can they find your content 
despite your site? Is search 
aligned with search engine 
optimization?

Accessible
Will it work for all users? Are 
features and results accessible 
to blind and visually impaired 
users? Can people search from 
a wide variety of platforms and 
browsers?

Credible
Does the design inspire trust? 
Do the order and display of 
results convey authority? Will 
users believe that the top 
results are the best or most 
popular or most relevant? 

Valuable
What is the value of search? 
Does it build the bottom line or 
advance the mission? Is the 
user experience aligned with 
strategy? Can search confer 
competitive advantage?

Figure 2-6. Qualities of the searcher’s experience

That’s a lot to know about users, and we’ve only just nicked the surface. We could study 
their patterns of behavior or explore how to apply user research methods to search. But 
we’ll save those topics for later. For now, let’s interact with the interface.

InTERFACE
The classic view of search implies a two-step process in which a user types a query into 
the box and is presented with a list of results. The interface bisects input and output. 
It’s a delightfully simple model. It’s also increasingly wrong. Today, the speed of search 
and the richness of interaction blur the lines between query and results. Subsecond 
responses let us search, scan results, skim content, and search again. Autocomplete asks 
for only a letter or two before it suggests queries and recommends results, and faceted 
navigation rewards us with a map that is the territory. Query, results, content, and inter-
face flow into one another in a journey that changes the destination. This intertwing-
led reality means we have to work together. Designers, engineers, and creators are all 
responsible. It also means we can’t rely on old patterns for the interface. We must think 
outside the box.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 2: The Anatomy of Search30

ResultsQuery

Users

Interface

Goals
Psychology
Behavior

Interaction
Affordances
Language

Figure 2-7. The interface includes query and results

To begin, we might consider affordance. What are the real and perceived action pos-
sibilities? This simple query submits readily to the maxim of the Five Ws (and one H), as 
memorialized in a poem by Rudyard Kipling:

“ 	I	keep	six	honest	serving-men
(They	taught	me	all	I	knew);

Their	names	are	What	and	Why	and	When

And	How	and	Where	and	Who.?” 1
In journalism, this maxim is useful for getting the full story. In search, it’s helpful for cre-
ating and analyzing whole interfaces and their (perceived) affordances. 

1 Just So Stories, Rudyard Kipling (Puffin).

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Interface 31

Who am I, searching?

Can users see their identity and 
status? Will they know about 
content and features that are 
subject to authentication and 
access control?

Where am I, searching?

Can users see their (physical or 
digital) location and context? 
Will the results be shaped by 
where they are and where 
they’ve been?

Why am I searching?

What is the user’s goal? Should 
we optimize for lookup or 
learn? And, what will the user 
need to do? What features and 
actions are required? 

What am I searching?

Do users get the scope? Do 
they know how much and 
where from? How will they see 
which content and metadata is 
being searched?

When am I searching?

Is time evident in the interface? 
How will users know the 
difference between and the 
limits of querying content 
that’s old and new?

How can I search?

Are affordances easy to 
perceive? How will users know 
the language of search? How 
are multisensory interaction 
options made clear?

?

Figure 2-8. The Five Ws (and one H)

The most obvious questions are what and how. What am I searching? How can I search? 
An interface that fails to answer simply fails. But it’s also worth asking who, where, when, 
and why. These questions stretch our minds. They encourage us to think more holisti-
cally about the interface and how it separates and binds together input and output.

Which returns us to results. The search engine results page or SERP, as pictured in Figure 
2-9, is among the most complex and important challenges to design. We’ll study the 
concepts, elements, and design patterns in detail later. For now, suffice it to say that 
whether the results are too few, too many, or just plain wrong, this interface addresses a 
pivotal point in the user experience. The surprise of results opens a gap in the paradox 
of the active user. It’s at this critical juncture that people know they are lost and admit 
they need help. It’s a teachable moment in which real humans (even grown men) will 
actually accept advice, read maps, customize parameters, and choose carefully from a 
list of next steps. It’s a tiny gap, and it closes fast. We must be ready with the right design 
empowered by the right technology, because behind every great search interface is an 
engine that delivers results.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 2: The Anatomy of Search32

Filters

The Box

Title

Snippet

URL

D
is

am
b

ig
ua

tio
n

W
hi

ch
 “fl

ow
” d

id
 y

ou
 m

ea
n?

Personalization

Advanced

Blended results

Visited link

Find similar

Keyword in context

Related searches

Pagination

Search again
Options

Navigation

Sp
onsored results

Figure 2-9. Anatomy of a SERP

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Engine 33

EngInE
Most of us have no idea how stuff works. We are surrounded by technology sufficiently 
advanced that it’s indistinguishable from magic. We can’t possibly know everything, so 
we specialize. And outside our niche, we satisfice. We learn just enough to get by. As us-
ers, we rely on mental models to tame our technology. These simple explanations and 
visualizations, often derived via metaphor, keep us safe and efficient. For instance, we 
know how to use a toaster: insert bread, lower handle, wait for the pop. We also know 
not to chase a missing earring with a fork before unplugging the toaster, since the elec-
tricity that flows like water from the wall up the cord to the appliance might rush up the 
fork and zap us. This mental model is not technically correct, but it does keep us alive. 
Now, if we want to be better users, we may need better models. How should we adjust 
the timer for the second batch of toast? What if the kitchen is hot or cold? To answer, we 
must know the basics of capacitors and resistors, or we can learn by trial and error. If we 
aspire to build a better toaster, we’ll need even richer models and a deep understanding 
of users, technology, and how they (might) interact in the real world.

Figure 2-10. Anatomy of a toaster 2

The same is true in search. Users have no idea how search works. Most designers aren’t 
sure, either. We treat search as a black box. We rely on engineers to define parameters 
for input and output. And we miss opportunities to make search better. It’s time to 
change. Designers must learn more about engines, indexes, and algorithms. And we 
should reach out and collaborate with engineers. We should engage them in the pro-
cess of design and inject ourselves into search engine selection and configuration. Our 
expertise reveals what’s desirable. Their skill and insight shows what’s possible. By work-
ing together, we can identify risks, invent new solutions, and make search better.

2 Dave Gray hosts a wonderful set of toaster diagrams as part of his visual thinking collection at 
www.flickr.com/photos/davegray/collections/72157600017554580/.

www.it-ebooks.info

v@v
Text Box
Download at WoweBook.com

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 2: The Anatomy of Search34

Engine

Content

In
te

rf
ac

e

SearchResults

IndexAlgorithms

QueryResponse

Engine

Designers must be involved in selecting a 
search vendor and application. User needs 
and the information architecture strategy 
should inform requirements analysis.  

Index

Indexing defines which content and 
metadata fields are searchable and how. 
Federated searching across multiple indexes 
may slow performance. 

Algorithms

Results can be ranked by relevance, date, 
format, popularity, etc. Tuning the engine 
for your mix of content, user needs, and 
business goals makes all the difference.

User

Engineer

Designer

Interface

Engineers should help with brainstorming. 
They may see possibilities for improving or 
reinventing search applications that are 
invisible to designers and executives.

Learning + Collaboration
Designers must learn more 
about how search works. And, 
we should collaborate more 
effectively with engineers.   

Figure 2-11. Learning together

Ideally, the evaluation of search applications is preceded by development of an informa-
tion architecture strategy that puts user needs and business goals ahead of the features 
and limitations of software products. As we’ll discuss later in this chapter, the informa-
tion architecture positions search within a broader context, allowing us to see how the 
multiple modes of ask, search, browse, and filter can work together. This blueprint clari-
fies priorities with respect to what we will actually need from search. Of course, more 
often than not, firms put the cart before the horse. There’s usually plenty we can do to 
work with and around any engine, but there’s no harm in hoping for blue skies.

On the other hand, it’s irresponsible to design an information architecture without prac-
tical consideration of technology, staff, and cost. A limited budget may suggest a hosted 
solution such as Google Custom Search. An open source solution like Solr may be right if 
there’s sufficient in-house technical expertise. If not, the quick install and easy configu-
ration of Microsoft Search Server may appeal. If the user experience is mission-critical to 
your business, a high-end information access platform (like Endeca or Autonomy) that 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Engine 35

manages more than search may be the way to go. Each class and product imposes limits 
on what’s possible and what’s easy. For this reason, the architecture should be informed 
by analysis of the realistic outcomes of search engine selection.

A designer can add further value during the software selection process by building on 
the blueprint. Organizations often cover the bases in terms of technology and finance 
but fail to press vendors on exactly what will be required to support their unique mix of 
features and content. A typical checklist may include the following:

System architecture
Formal description of the hardware and software components, including crawlers, 
indexers, data models, and query parsers.

Performance
How many simultaneous queries are supported? What’s the maximum number of 
sources? How about the size of the data repository?

File formats
What types of content and data (e.g., HTML, PDF, mySQL) are supported? Can the 
system handle both structured and unstructured data?

Integration
Is there a standards-based Web Services API for embedding search functionality in 
other sites and software? Is there a list of available connectors? 

Access control
Does the system support multiple levels of access for different user types and indi-
viduals? How does it manage privacy and security?

Features
How does the system handle full text and metadata? Does it support Boolean opera-
tors, wildcards, stemming, stop words, phrase and proximity searching, and spellcheck? 
What algorithms are used for ranking? What are the options for query refinement? Can 
results be saved, printed, and shared? 

Implementation
What sort of expertise is required for installation, configuration, and maintenance? 
How does the vendor handle training and support?

Pricing model
Is the product priced by data or activity volume, CPUs, features, and/or number of 
unique applications? How about support, maintenance, and professional services 
fees? What’s the total cost of ownership?

Vendor credentials
How long has the vendor been in business? How are they positioned in the market? 
Can we see their financials and customer references?

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 2: The Anatomy of Search36

These are all necessary questions, but they’re also insufficient. Because there’s so much 
ground to cover, it’s easy to lose sight of the goal. The designer’s role is to repeatedly 
refocus attention on the user experience. A supplemental checklist that’s informed by 
an information architecture strategy and empathy for the user might include:

Speed
What will it take to ensure subsecond response in the real world? It’s worth asking 
this question early and often. Don’t take “slow” for an answer!

Relevance tuning
How are results ranked? Is it possible to adjust the settings to allow for popularity, 
content type, date, and diversity?

Navigation and filtering
Is it easy to customize sort order and limit options? Is there native support for fac-
eted navigation? Is it fast?

Federated search
How does the system handle the simultaneous search of multiple databases or in-
dexes? What is the impact on speed? Is it possible to merge several indexes into one 
to dramatically improve performance?

Linguistic toolset
Is there support for thesaurus integration and crosswalking between vocabularies? 
How about autocategorization and entity extraction?

Search analytics
What tools are provided for measuring and understanding user behavior? Is there an 
API that supports sharing and repurposing of this data?

These lists are just a way to start the conversation between designers and engineers. We 
must also track emerging technologies, because what’s possible in search keeps shift-
ing. Because these changes come from so many directions, we need all the eyeballs we 
can get. By working together, we’re likely to make better purchase decisions, identify 
the long-term costs associated with continuous improvement, and generate insights 
that lead to innovation in search and discovery. Plus, we’ll learn a little more about how 
stuff works.

ConTEnT
The design of a search application is defined by its content. A social network, an im-
age library, and a mixed media database merit totally different solutions. For starters, 
the availability (or lack thereof ) of full text and metadata shapes the what and how of 
search. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Content 37

Web Page Book

Query

Document Object

In
d

ex
C

ontent

Figure 2-12. Relative value of text and metadata

Consider, for instance, these four content types and their associated search scenarios:

Web page
A web page includes both visible content and off-the-page HTML tags for title, de-
scription, and keywords. The first appears in the browser’s title bar and the second in 
the snippets of search results. All of these embedded metadata tags are indexed by 
web search engines, but keywords are not weighted heavily, due to spam concerns 
(e.g., keyword stuffing). Inbound links from other pages and the collective naviga-
tion, search, and post-query behavior of many users deliver rich streams of external 
metadata. In the case of hypertextual web pages, engines can rely on this full spec-
trum of content and metadata to discern meaning, which is why Google appears to 
work like magic.

Document
On a typical underfunded intranet, search engines must rely solely on the contents 
of technical reports, white papers, spreadsheets, presentations, marketing materials, 
and online forms to reveal their own aboutness. The absence of structured metadata 
precludes faceted navigation, and full-text relevance-ranking algorithms struggle 
with the heterogeneity of multiple content types and lengths. There are limits on 
how much meaning can be “automagically” extracted from natural language, which 
is why intranet search is so bad. 

Book
In books, Amazon draws upon a rich index for search and navigation. While lacking 
Google’s database of inbound links, Amazon enjoys everything else: full-text con-
tent, social data, and behavioral metadata. Plus, it has oodles of formal, structured 
metadata to enable filtering, sorting, personalization, and faceted navigation, which 
is why Amazon integrates search and browse so well. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 2: The Anatomy of Search38

Object
In the absence of full text, metadata is often a forced move. In cars, investment in 
controlled vocabularies and structured metadata is required, and search is limited 
to fields like make, model, price, and fuel efficiency. In images, Flickr found a way to 
share the cost with tags, notes, descriptions, and comments that power findability 
surprisingly well. Nontext objects present major challenges to search, which is why 
they inspire so much innovation.

Of course, we need not be satisfied with the status quo. Since complexity of the infor-
mation retrieval challenge increases exponentially with linear increases in volume, we 
know the most dramatic way to improve performance is to search less content. 

Redundant
Outdated
Trivial

Topic Format

Date

Author

LanguageLocation

Audience Source

Rating

Content
Shrink the search 
space by removing 
the ROT.

Metadata
Provide filters so users can 

slice up the search space.

Creator User DesignerDesigner

Figure 2-13. To search better, search less

So, early in the design process, it’s worth asking two questions. First, can we shrink the 
search space by removing ROT, content that’s redundant or outdated or trivial? By craft-
ing a content policy that defines what’s in and out, then rigorously weeding their col-
lections, organizations are often able to cut what’s searched by half. Second, can we add 
metadata fields that let users slice content into smaller sections? Even a massive article 
database becomes manageable when users can limit searches by topic and date.

These questions invite consideration of context. What is the business model? What can 
we afford to invest? How much content are we talking about? Where does it come from? 
How quickly will it grow or change? And what about metadata? Is its creation inher-
ent to the publishing process? Should we hire librarians? Or can software handle entity 
extraction and autocategorization? When we look at content, it’s easy to get technical. 
After all, this is the domain of information technology. But we should also get social, 
because search is a network that includes and inspires the creators behind the content.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Creators 39

CREAToRS
In the early days, adventures in search required vertical integration and an entrepre-
neurial spirit. During the 1960s, pioneers of the first information retrieval networks 
couldn’t rely on existing infrastructure—they had to design the whole system. Hard-
ware, software, networks, protocols, algorithms, content and metadata creation, user 
training, and billing were part and parcel of the job. In contrast, today we enjoy a robust 
infrastructure that affords specialization. Modern search tools and technologies allow 
us to concentrate on customization. Unfortunately, they also let us be lazy. It’s all too 
easy to focus on interface design without challenging our creativity by reimagining con-
tent and context. 

That’s why the biggest innovations in search come from outside the category. Wikipedia 
serves as a case in point. By reinventing the encyclopedia as a collaborative work, Jimmy 
Wales made a huge improvement to search. While Google is the means, Wikipedia is 
the end. We Google to find the Wikipedia article. It’s inevitably at the top of results. The 
cocreators of Wikipedia invest time in writing and editing because they know their ar-
ticles will be found via Google. Wikipedia is a tool that embodies process and incentives. 
It motivates millions of users to become creators of content and metadata, in part by 
sharing its analytics in detail. In addition to overall statistics, we can see data about each 
article, user, and creator. This transparency is conducive to widely distributed competi-
tion and collaboration. It’s a success story in which knowledge management and search 
combine to foster a participation economy where the reward is recognition. It’s also a 
repeatable solution to a common problem. This social design pattern, which enlists us-
ers as cocreators and coorganizers, has been copied liberally by entrepreneurs under 
the banner of Web 2.0. And while they may have already grabbed the low-hanging fruit, 
it’s a really big tree that has much to offer search.

Designers of search applications must no longer accept content in its current state. It’s 
time to shake the tree. Questions we should ask include:

• Who are the current (and potential) creators of content?

• How can we motivate them to improve quality and quantity?

• What tools and processes will make publishing faster and easier?

• How can we enlist users in content creation and organization?

• How can we share analytics to inspire both use and cocreation?

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 2: The Anatomy of Search40

Content

Analytics

Incentives

Process

Tools

Metadata

Search & Discovery Knowledge Management

DesignersUsers Creators

Figure 2-14. Knowledge management and search

Search is social. This realization invites us to think, not only about information and 
technology, but also about people. Of course, we shouldn’t stop there. It’s a mistake 
to believe the source of all creation is human. Sensors are creators, too. Increasingly, 
networks of sensors allow us to query temperature, pollution, traffic density, and prod-
uct availability. Our mobile devices know their own locations, which changes how we 
search and how we are found. How can we improve the quality and quantity of content 
and metadata to advance user and business goals as they relate to search and discov-
ery? Who (and what) are all the potential creators? These are the questions we ask when 
we see that knowledge management is part of search. And, upon finding we’re engaged 
in the holistic design of complex adaptive systems, we understand that we need a new 
map.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Context 41

ConTExT
The late Harvard professor Alan Watts, in a lecture on Eastern philosophy, used the fol-
lowing analogy to introduce the subject of context: 

“ 	If	I	draw	a	circle,	most	people,	when	asked	what	I	have	drawn,	will	say	I	have	drawn	a	circle	or	a	disc,	or	a	ball.?	Very	few	people	will	say	I’ve	drawn	a	hole	in	the	wall,	
because	most	people	think	of	the	inside	first,	rather	than	thinking	of	the	outside.?	
But	actually	these	two	sides	go	together—you	cannot	have	what	is	‘in	here’	unless	
you	have	what	is	‘out	there.?’”

A similar reaction occurs when we hear the word “search.” We tend to think inside the 
box. We forget that the search “in here” is made possible by the structure “out there.” 
That’s why the design of search applications is best framed by information architecture. 
We need a framework that positions search within the broader context of organization, 
navigation, personalization, and discovery. We need maps that reveal the paths, edges, 
districts, nodes, and landmarks of the user experience. We also need blueprints that 
show the complex relationships between form, function, structure, process, and goal.

Let’s consider, for instance, a website. Most sites don’t need search. Browse is sufficient 
for the vast majority of simple sites operated by individuals and small firms. A solid tax-
onomy with clear categories and labels is enough. Perhaps a sitemap or index is useful 
to complement navigation, but search is unnecessary. In fact, adding search may be 
downright dangerous, since most queries will lead to nowhere. However, when success 
leads to big business, the architecture must change. Browse fails to scale. For this rea-
son, the sites of large organizations often exhibit the following problems:

Fragmentation
Fragmentation into multiple sites, domains, and identities becomes a huge distrac-
tion. Users don’t know which site or subsite to visit for which purpose, and the lack 
of consistent, intuitive intersite search and navigation makes it hard to find content 
without knowing source and location.

Findability
Users can’t find what they need from the home page, but that’s only the start of the 
problem. Most users don’t come through the front door; they enter via a web search 
or a deep link, and are confused by what they do find. Even worse, most potential 
users never use the site, because many of its resources aren’t easily discoverable via 
Google or other web search engines.

So, for most people, the content is invisible. You can’t use what you can’t find. And for 
those who do find the site, the experience is frustrating. These problems are common 
for good reason. By necessity, in large organizations, different groups are responsible 
for different pages, sites, and services. Over time, in the absence of a master plan, the 
structure devolves into a chaotic sprawl reminiscent of the Winchester Mystery House, 
a well-known California mansion that was under construction continuously for 38 years.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 2: The Anatomy of Search42

The Winchester Mystery House

The house was once the home of 
Sarah Winchester, the widow of gun 
magnate William Winchester. 

According to legend, after her 
daughter and husband both died 
young, Sarah consulted a psychic 
who told of a curse upon the family 
intended to avenge all the lives 
taken by the guns they made.

Sarah was told to build a home for 
herself and the fallen spirits, and if 
she ever stopped building, she too 
would die. The house is reportedly 
haunted.

Figure 2-15. The Winchester Mystery House

The Winchester Mystery House has 160 rooms, 40 staircases, 467 doorways, and no 
blueprint. It’s not an unattractive house, and the view from any individual room isn’t 
particularly unusual or overwhelming, but it’s virtually impossible to grasp the whole 
or to find your way. 

When a site reaches this scale, it’s time to look for the levers. Since we all must live within 
limits, it’s imperative that we identify strategic opportunities where leverage affords the 
most positive impact for the effort and investment. In the context of websites, three key 
areas often emerge as powerful fulcra with the potential to move mountains: the portal, 
search system, and destination objects, as shown in Figure 2-16. 

In a moment, we’ll explore these fulcra in the context of a big organization and its web-
site. We’ll examine the unique potential of each lever. But first, it’s vital to recognize their 
interdependent nature. The information infrastructure of objects and search serves as 
a necessary foundation for a successful, sustainable, user-centered portal. As users shift 
between modes of browsing, searching, and reading, proper integration enables a sense 
of flow. The whole is greater than the sum of its parts. A concept map, as shown in Figure 
2-17, can help us to realize this big picture. The goal is to capture the key elements so we 
can begin to discuss how they relate. In The Back of the Napkin, Dan Roam defines what 
he calls the garage-sale principle: “Everything looks different when we can see it all at 
once.”3 An early stage concept map is an effective way to put all the parts on the table.

3 The Back of the Napkin, Dan Roam (Penguin Books).

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Context 43

Search Objects

Portal

Find

About

Di
sc

ov
er

y

Paths
Patterns

Incentives

Users

Brand

Findable Social

Goal
Gateway

CollectionAsk Browse

Federated
Faceted

Fast

“Give me a fulcrum and a place to stand,     
and I will move the world.” 

                                                     
—Archimedes

Figure 2-16. Three fulcra of large websites

UsersStaff

Internet

Objects

Sites

Collections

Search

To
p

ic
Fo

rm
at

Ke
yw

or
d

URLsFeeds Links

Categories

Small Object icons: Created by Joseph Wain and shared under a Creative Commons Attribution license.

Portal

Figure 2-17. A concept map

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 2: The Anatomy of Search44

PoRTAl
The portal, which includes the home page and the top few layers of the website, often 
presents an opportunity to improve the user experience and the brand. A user-centered 
redesign that helps people learn about the organization and its services, fosters ex-
ploration and discovery, and supports fast, effective search and navigation can make 
a big impact. Emphasis should be placed on providing multiple paths to the same in-
formation so that users can search or browse by format, topic, and keyword. Audience 
gateways should be provided but not relied upon, since most goal-oriented users won’t 
use them, it’s impossible to predict what every member of each audience might want 
to find, and information-seeking behavior tends to vary more by search expertise and 
institutional familiarity than by role or profession. The portal should support directed 
search while enabling discovery. For instance, a robust version of Most Popular (similar 
to the approach taken by the New York Times) can often attract a great deal of interest. 
In reimagining the portal, it’s also worth reconsidering the umbrella architecture, which 
may include multiple sites, domains, and identities. Are these divisions really useful to 
users, or do they exist solely as symptoms of organizational dysfunction?

The portal, in conjunction with a content management system, can also serve as a pow-
erful tool for aligning staff efforts and incentives with user needs and goals. First, by 
establishing design patterns built upon industry best practices, the portal can provide 
staff in each unit with the tools, templates, and style guides necessary to implement a 
more consistent identity and suite of interfaces throughout the sites, collections, and 
documents. Second, since the portal has a significant influence on findability, a clear set 
of design standards and recommendations has a good chance of adoption. For instance, 
items should only be directly linked to from the portal if they meet a high standard (e.g., 
full compliance with the design template), and items should only appear at the top of 
search results if they meet a middle standard (e.g., assignment of descriptive metadata). 
The power of findability as a lever can be further strengthened by regular reporting of 
web analytics. A one-page report that highlights key metrics each month and is widely 
distributed can improve accountability and sensitivity to user needs and behaviors.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Context 45

SEARCH
Massive scale means that search must be positioned at the center of the digital architec-
ture. The portal presents an opportunity to implement a consistent experience through 
the top layers. However, in the absence of a paradigm shift in our big organization’s ap-
proach to the Web, it is unrealistic to expect total conformity throughout the site, espe-
cially when you consider the inevitable change of technologies and priorities over time. 
The fact is that browsing simply doesn’t scale. At a certain point, it becomes impossible 
to avoid creating a digital version of the Winchester Mystery House.

And yet, sites and services as diverse as Amazon, Google, Flickr, and Wikipedia have all 
developed solutions that work despite their lack of centralized control over content and 
metadata. They have succeeded by embracing search-centered solutions that recog-
nize that searching and browsing must be used in combination to help people effec-
tively navigate. These solutions typically possess the following three qualities:

Federated
Since most users don’t know where to look, the site should allow people to perform 
searches across all of its content. This should not preclude advanced, focused que-
ries on particular collections or databases.

Faceted
The site should embrace faceted navigation (with flexible search scopes) as widely 
as possible so that users can move fluidly from searching the site to searching a 
content collection or a product catalog without having to start over or learn a new 
interface. Global facets might include topic, format, date, and author. Each database 
might present additional category-specific facets to support narrowing and filtering.

Fast
The organization must invest in the hardware, software, and staff necessary to de-
liver subsecond response times. Speed is absolutely critical in allowing users to fully 
engage in an iterative, interactive search experience.

Amazon serves as an excellent example. The site provides fast, federated search across 
many collections (e.g., books, electronics, toys, and automotive tools). Users can select a 
category and then search or they can search first, then select a category. Faceted naviga-
tion presents users with a customized, interactive map of their results and ample oppor-
tunities to narrow or filter those results. Plus, the facets adapt; they progressively conform 
to the content as users shift between categories or drill down within collections.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 2: The Anatomy of Search46

Limited facets after 
initial search.

Rich facets upon 
selecting a category.

Figure 2-18. Amazon’s adaptive facets

Finally, Amazon’s Product Pages are easily findable via Google. They have relatively sim-
ple URLs to support sharing and inbound links. They also offer options for tagging, rat-
ing, and reviewing that ultimately support even better navigation (from the page) and 
findability (to the page). In short, Amazon’s Product Pages are findable, social objects.

oBjECTS
Similarly, our big organization has an opportunity to make its content more social (vi-
ral) and findable by adopting best practices in search engine optimization and social 
media design. This requires redesigning the objects of search to serve as destinations, 
gateways, and subjects of conversation. Amazon does this well. So does Flickr. Photos 
are easily findable via Google or Flickr’s own search system, and each photo offers many 
options for finding similar photos or for finding other photos from the same source, set, 
pool, or collection. Plus, users are invited to add tags, notes, and comments. Each photo 
is a catalyst for conversation and community. Additionally, the object isn’t stuck on the 
page. Users can share photos across multiple devices, channels, and services. We can 
order prints or add our image to stickers, calendars, business cards, T-shirts, magnets, 
puzzles, and mugs. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Context 47

Figure 2-19. Flickr user model 4

This versatility didn’t arise by accident. Flickr’s About page describes an explicit experi-
ence strategy with two main goals:

“ 	We	want	to	help	people	make	their	content	available	to	the	people	who	matter	to	them.?
We	want	to	enable	new	ways	of	organizing	photos	and	video.?	”

Flickr describes itself as “the WD-40 that makes it easy to get photos or video from one 
person to another in whatever way they want” and lists the Web, mobile devices, soft-
ware applications, RSS feeds, email messages, and blogs as just some of those ways to 
import and export content. Finally, Flickr notes that part of the solution is to make the 
process collaborative:

4 Image by Bryce Glass, http://soldierant.net/archives/uploads/2007/10/FlickrUserModel_v3.pdf.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 2: The Anatomy of Search48

“ 	In	Flickr,	you	can	give	your	friends,	family,	and	other	contacts	permission	to	organize	your	stuff—not	just	to	add	comments,	but	also	notes	and	tags.?	People	like	
to	ooh	and	ahh,	laugh	and	cry,	make	wisecracks	when	sharing	photos	and	videos.?	
Why	not	give	them	the	ability	to	do	this	when	they	look	at	them	over	the	internet??	
And	as	all	this	info	accretes	as	metadata,	you	can	find	things	so	much	easier	later	
on,	since	all	this	info	is	also	searchable.?”

In this way, the social and findable elements form a virtuous circle in which conversation 
promotes findability and vice versa, which is why Flickr has succeeded so well.

All TogETHER now
In conclusion, having identified the objects plus the portal and search as strategic op-
portunities where leverage affords impact, the trick is weaving them together so that 
each element becomes a vital part of the whole. This returns us to Amazon, which 
serves as a great example of a service that has embraced and integrated all three fulcra. 
The portal supports multiple paths to the same information. It offers federated, faceted, 
fast search. And it’s all built upon an object-oriented foundation that positions Product 
Pages as the ultimate destination and conversation objects, and as gateways to related 
content.

Amazon also manages to keep alive the entrepreneurial spirit by engaging the whole 
ecosystem. With the Kindle, Amazon developed a software and hardware platform for 
reading e-books and other digital media. With its self-publishing program, Amazon in-
vented a new mix of tools, processes, and incentives to turn users into creators. And, 
with customer reviews and transparent analytics (e.g., customers who bought this item 
also bought these items, dynamic sales rank by category), Amazon has made it easier to 
find and learn. These folks are reinventing publishing by changing the means of produc-
tion and distribution. They’re also designing the ultimate place to search. 

By working hard to serve users, refine the interface, tune the engine, enhance the con-
tent, and motivate creators while simultaneously striving to leverage and transform the 
wider context, Amazon and a handful of other pioneering firms are showing us how to 
make search better. We can’t copy all that they do; some solutions are uniquely situated. 
But we can learn a lot from their example. It’s about time we read the writing on the wall.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Context 49

Object
Product Page

Subject

Format

Audience

Popularity

Tag

Rate

Review

Share

Frequently
Bought Together

Common
Next Steps

Author

Subject

Category

Format

Audience

Popularity

Tags

Lists

Guides

Phrases

Citations

C
ol

le
ct

io
n

s

Pr
od

uc
ts

Se
lf

-P
ub

lis
h

in
g

Creators

Users

Portal

Search

Google Search

Browse
Category

Findable

Social

Figure 2-20. A map of Amazon

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 2: The Anatomy of Search50

Engine

Content

ResultsQuery

Interface

Users

Creators

Figure 2-21. The hole in the whole

In particular, we must improve our ability to zoom in and out. It’s essential that we study 
the anatomy of search. To get each element right requires obsessive attention to detail. 
We must divide to understand. But we must also dare to lose focus. We must step back 
and consider the context. Search is only a subset of an information architecture and a 
wider communication ecology that together shape the user experience.

To make search better, we must ask larger questions. How do we turn users into cre-
ators? What are the ingredients for self-organization? Can we achieve our goals without 
search? How might search inspire us to reach for new goals? To see the big picture, we 
must know the parts and the whole. We need frameworks, maps, and blueprints; boxes 
and arrows that help us visualize relationships between a means and the end. But we 
can’t stop with strategy and structure, because search is a system that flows. The inter-
face is only half of interaction. To achieve a holistic understanding of search, we must 
witness the system and the user in the act, together as one. And for that, we must study 
behavior.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Behavior

“ 	If	you	have	to	ask	what	jazz	is,	you’ll	never	know.?”—Louis Armstrong
In music, improvisation is the art of creating a song while performing it, in the moment 
and in response to interplay and interaction. Along with blue notes, polyrhythms, and 
syncopation, improv is fundamental to the nature of jazz. The freedom and spontaneity 
of the solo passes from saxophone to piano to trumpet in the call-and-response pattern 
of African-American field hollers, while the drums and double bass weave a musical fab-
ric in conversational rhythm. Good jazz engages the listener. It’s hard to resist the spell-
binding power of a player with chops who’s in the pocket. We become fully immersed in 
a state of flow that dissolves the lines between act and actor. As the artist Henri Matisse 
once noted, “There are wonderful things in real jazz, the talent for improvisation, the 
liveliness, the being at one with the audience.”

In designing the interaction of search, we’d do well to keep jazz in mind, because be-
havior is a conversation and flow is a state worth striving for. When we search, our 
actions are reactions to the stimuli of information and interface. The box and its con-
trols shape how we search, and what we find changes what we seek. The distinction 
between user and system dissolves in behavior. It’s an activity that’s open to flow. At its 
best, search absorbs our attention totally. Our experience of time and self are altered. 
We become lost in the most positive of senses. But we don’t get in the groove by acci-
dent. As Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi explains, activities such as music, dancing, sailing, and 
chess are conducive to flow because “they were designed to make optimal experience 
easier to achieve.”1 They offer challenge, give control, support learning, reward skill, and 
provide feedback. We can both design for flow and experience flow in design, since our 
practice offers ample challenge and reward for those with the chops to put the swing 
in search. 

1 Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (Harper).

3

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior52

Interface

Information

User

Figure 3-1. Behavior is a conversation

Of course, music isn’t written on a blank slate. In the words of Wynton Marsalis, “Im-
provisation isn’t a matter of just making any ol’ thing up. Jazz, like any language, has 
its own grammer and vocabulary. There’s no right or wrong, just some choices that are 
better than others.” Similarly, there are patterns of behavior, elements of interaction, and 
principles of design that form the building blocks of search. The elements are always in 
flux. Technology shifts interaction from mouse and keyboard to multitouch to freeform 
gestures in thin air. But our patterns and principles? They’re timeless, both limited and 
inspired by the nature of information and the inherent affordances of our senses.

PATTERnS oF BEHAvIoR
Search ends with an exit. Users always quit. The question is, why? Did they find what 
they need or simply give up? Was it the information or the interface? Too little, too 
much, too slow? Quit is a pattern that demands analytics. We must know the reason 
they’re leaving. 

Quit

ResultsQuery

Figure 3-2. Quit is the most common pattern

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Patterns of Behavior 53

For instance, are we sending users away with No Results? If so, perhaps we can improve 
the interface. In Figure 3-3, Yale University fails to state the system status clearly (e.g., 
“No results were found”), but otherwise provides a good combination of feedback and 
next steps. Links to popular pages and popular searches might also be helpful.

Original query + search (again) box

Spell check
Unnecessary repetition

Useful browse options

Figure 3-3. No results at Yale

On the other hand, if we can help users avoid “No Results” in the first place, that’s even 
better. As Figure 3-4 shows, we’re less likely to reach a dead end at Amazon, thanks to 
the autoexpand strategy of partial match, in which unrecognized keywords are omit-
ted from the query string. Even a match against some search terms may be better than 
none.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior54

Original query + search (again) box
System status

Plus: autosuggest
avoids No Results.

Figure 3-4. Amazon works to avoid no results

When users don’t quit, they refine. Narrow is the second most common pattern around. 
Our initial query casts a wide net. Upon seeing results, we pull back. Sometimes, we can 
avoid such initial imprecision. A wider box invites more words. So does experience with 
large (and growing) bodies of content. In fact, the average number of keywords per 
query in web search has moved from 1–2 to 2–3 in recent years. 

Narrow

ResultsQuery Results

Figure 3-5. Query refinement

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Patterns of Behavior 55

But presearch has its limits. Advance query specification is difficult, because we don’t 
know the size or structure of the index. When we’re searching without a map, even a tra-
ditional SERP tells us a lot. The nature of snippets and the number of results lets us judge 
how (and how much) to narrow. In particular, diversity algorithms ensure we can sort 
out synonyms. Upon seeing sample results from each distinct meaning (e.g., psychology 
versus cover flow), we can disambiguate our query.

Even better, faceted navigation puts metadata on the map. As Figure 3-6 shows, Artist 
Rising lets us clarify whether we want drinking bars (places) or lemon bars (cuisine) and 
photos or paintings. Plus, we can refine by searching within these results. And even Sort 
provides a way to limit what we see. Artist Rising offers us many ways to narrow.

Sort

Expand Facets

Search within

Figure 3-6. Faceted navigation puts metadata on the map

The opposite pattern is rare. Expand is uncommon, partly because users often cast a 
wide net to begin, and partly because it’s a harder problem. Of course, users can try a 
broader query. When “low fat lemon bar” returns no results, we omit “low fat” and try 
again. And we can relax constraints. In Artist Rising, we can undo facet value selections 
or remove keywords to expand the query by closing the box. We can always take a step 
back. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior56

Expand

Query ResultsResults

Figure 3-7. Casting the net wider

However, explicit support for expand is rare. It’s most commonly seen in the thesaurus 
browsers of library databases, as shown in Figure 3-8, where structured vocabularies 
and the risky expectation of searcher expertise afford designers a sense of freedom to 
reveal the hierarchy (and potential polyhierarchy) that connects to broader terms. 

Explode also 
expands the 
search query

Expand

Figure 3-8. CSA Illumina’s thesaurus browser

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Patterns of Behavior 57

Rather than a formal hierarchy, search applications often let users expand (or at least 
explore) by showing related terms within matching categories, as shown in Figure 3-9. 

Figure 3-9. Matching categories and related terms

Independent of interface, expert searchers employ a singular strategy for expansion 
known as pearl growing. Find one good document, then mine its content and metadata 
for query terms and leads. We might look for more articles about this topic, by this au-
thor, or from this source. Pearl growing is an old trick that’s taught in library school. 

Pearl Growing

Document Results

Figure 3-10. A strategy for finding similar results

Fortunately, pearl growing is also a strategy we can spread by embedding it within the 
interface. Google’s Similar link is the most ubiquitous example. Although the algorithms 
may be complex, the user needs only to click a link.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior58

Figure 3-11. Find similar

Similarly, music recommender systems make it easy to find songs we like by comparing 
the attributes, ratings, and collaborative filtering data of songs we know and those we 
don’t. Last.fm and Pandora rely heavily on up and down ratings of individual songs.

Figure 3-12. Similar controls at Last.fm and Pandora

iTunes Genius, shown in Figure 3-13, pays more attention to the songs in our personal 
collections. Either way, these systems make pearl growing fun and easy. From one song, 
we can find many similar songs to buy and enjoy. 

Similar
songs

iPhone Desktop

Figure 3-13. Apple’s Genius

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Patterns of Behavior 59

The patterns of behavior we’ve covered so far—quit, narrow, expand, and pearl grow—
are timeless. They are inherent to search. Other patterns (or antipatterns) are produced 
by bad design. For instance, repetitive bouncing between the SERP and individual re-
sults is known as pogosticking. A little pogosticking means users are sampling results. 
That’s to be expected, but when it happens a lot, it’s not sampling; it’s a symptom. 

Pogosticking

Documents

Query Results

Figure 3-14. Pogosticking is an antipattern

Perhaps our snippets and metadata lack the scent users need to effectively scan results, 
so they must visit each one in turn. Or, if sequential viewing of results is a desirable pat-
tern, we need solutions that support this behavior. Cooliris, shown in Figure 3-15, uses 
the iPhone’s touchscreen to let users flick through image results in linear fashion. 

Flick through image
results with flexible size 
and resolution

Actionable results

Figure 3-15. No pogosticking at Cooliris

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior60

Lands’  End, shown in Figure 3-16, ensures the metadata and features that users need are 
available in the gallery of search results. It doesn’t stuff too many results on the page at 
the expense of rich summaries. A clear product image, displaying the sole on rollover, 
inline color selection, the name, and the price are just the right mix for most users.

Clear photos plus
the sole on rollover

Color changer

Metadata

Figure 3-16. Gallery of search results at Lands’ End

Another common antipattern is thrashing. In thrashing, a design flaw resides in users’ 
heads in the form of the anchoring bias. We set the anchor with our initial query, and 
then, despite poor results, we insist on small variations of the flawed search phrase rather 
than trying new approaches. 

Thrashing

Query Results

Figure 3-17. Thrashing derives from the anchoring bias

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Patterns of Behavior 61

For instance, a user searching for a concert may try many queries that begin with the 
(misspelled) nickname rather than switching to the performer’s full name. 

sachmo
sachmo concert
sachmo jazz concert
sachmo jazz festival
sachmo music festival
sachmo summer celebration

In Figure 3-18, Yahoo! illustrates two ways to break this pattern. First, autocomplete 
helps users avoid typos and get the query right to begin with. Second, autosuggest 
can recommend related queries that don’t include the original search term. This fea-
ture taps query reformulation data, the terms users enter after their first search fails, to 
make this semantic leap and help users who start in the wrong place to weigh anchor 
and move on.

Autocomplete Autosuggest

Figure 3-18. Autocomplete and autosuggest at Yahoo!

In fact, by identifying related concepts, autosuggest helps users to move forward (re-
fine), backward (expand), and sideways (related). Like many good design patterns, 
autosuggest multitasks. It’s a timely solution to a timeless problem. After all, both auto-
complete and autosuggest are recent additions online, made possible by the advance 
of technology. Even as core patterns of behavior endure, design patterns must adjust 
to new possibilities, which is why we must keep our eyes (and ears) attuned to the ele-
ments of interaction.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior62

ElEmEnTS oF InTERACTIon
It’s a stimulating period for the practice of interaction design. Emerging technologies 
reinvent what’s possible, new platforms challenge old metaphors, sensors add extra 
senses, and all this innovation disrupts our cozy patterns. A rare burst of evolutionary 
change is reshaping our expectations of interface. While the desktop still reigns su-
preme, the rapid adoption and improvement of mobile devices has our attention. The 
sensors and actuators of multitouch and gestural interaction are on our minds. Rich 
user interfaces blur the boundaries of web, desktop, and mobile applications. Design 
patterns flow back and forth between platforms in strange loops that keep us all on our 
toes. At such a heady time, it’s worth reviewing the elements of interaction that bind us 
to each platform.

The desktop is the most established platform and the main gateway to search. We all 
know the standard configuration: mouse, keyboard, monitor, speakers, and sometimes 
a video camera and microphone for audiovisual input. Once in a while we Ctrl-C a trick 
from the old command-line interface (CLI), but mostly we click and double-click the 
graphical user interface (GUI), dragging and dropping files and folders as we go. It’s a 
short distance from desktop to web, where sites and pages with URLs are simply new 
places for old faces. The boundaries are barely worth mention. Rollovers, hovers, clicks, 
and keywords are the main events, while menus, buttons, form fields, and links are the 
basic interface idioms.

In search, rich elements include scented widgets, Ajaxian calendars, DHTML sliders, 
radial menus, dynamic transitions, transparent overlays, drag-and-drop results, and 
advanced query wizards. There’s a great deal of freedom, and that’s part of the problem. 
In the absence of solid design process and principles, these rich elements give us more 
rope with which to hang our users. All too often, we sacrifice usability and accessibil-
ity for a sexy look and feel. Finding the right balance isn’t easy, mind you. The wealth 
of our palette affords us the paradox of choice, and we’re still learning to design the 
results. 

Figure 3-19. Sliders for filtering results

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Elements of Interaction 63

Of course, we can’t dwell on the desktop. Mobile is the fastest growing platform ever, 
and for many designers it’s the most interesting to boot. While it may add tiny screens 
and keyboards to our constraints, mobile also creates fabulous new avenues for inter-
action. Multitouch lets us tap to open, spread to zoom, and slide to scroll. A camera, 
microphone, and speakers offer multisensory I/O, and our devices know where they go. 
Location, altitude, bearing, and velocity are all new inputs for queries we have yet to 
conceive. Plus, the accelerometer lets us rotate to landscape, shake to clear, and lift to 
search. Sensors and actuators presage an era of gestural interaction beyond the device.

Figure 3-20. Mobile search interaction

While the Clapper is old and the Wii is popular, freeform gestural interaction is still in its 
infancy. Our presence opens doors, our hands turn on taps, and for paper towels, we wave 
to activate. However, our gestural vocabulary is limited and rarely applied to search. That 
said, it’s not too early to begin imagining gestural query interfaces and idioms for freeform 
discovery. In fact, now is precisely the time to think about how we want to search, before 
the next wave of innovation hype masks our view with froth and frivolity.

It’s smart to start with our senses. We can see, hear, touch, smell, and taste. We can sense 
acceleration, balance, pain, and the relative position of our body parts. We can feel a 
haptic buzz. How might we tap these channels of input and output? We can already 
search by singing. What’s next? Of course, we shouldn’t stop with our senses, since our 
sensors can know so much more. Location is just the beginning. Sensors can detect 
and measure everything from magnetic fields and air pollution around the globe to the 
heart rate and glucose levels of a single human body. Already, as shown in Figure 3-21, 
Ambient Devices is turning everyday objects into wireless information appliances. The 
umbrella’s handle pulses when rain is forecast, and the orb glows different colors to 
display real-time stock market trends, traffic patterns, pollen forecasts, and more. Sen-
sors are enabling us to search beyond our senses, and together with new devices and 
rich interfaces, they’re transforming the how, what, where, when, and why of discovery. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior64

Stock market Weather

Figure 3-21. Information at a glance from Ambient Devices

We are also searching across channels. For many applications, we can’t limit or predict 
the context of use. The experience is out of control. A search may start at home on 
the desktop, move to mobile on the bus, continue on an in-store kiosk, and end in the 
shelves. And it may have been a television or radio advertisement or a highway bill-
board that provoked the search in the first place. 

That’s why smart organizations take the time to map touchpoints across media and 
channels. By employing user experience research and service design principles to iden-
tify, optimize, and align all important interfaces and interactions with their products, 
services, and brands, organizations are able to improve customer satisfaction and the 
bottom line. Apple is the most famous case. The distinct features and the relationships 
between the iPod in your palm, the iTunes desktop application, and the iTunes Store 
on the Web serve as a familiar model. Apple’s genius was to locate key functions on the 
right platforms. As shown in Figure 3-22, we play on the device, manage on the desktop, 
and buy at the store. Of course, we search across all three. Early iPods and iPhones lacked 
search. It wasn’t necessary until it was. Now, it’s both a feature and a multichannel oppor-
tunity, because Apple needs better design and integration across platforms. The search 
applications are there, at last. But they’re not insanely great!

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Elements of Interaction 65

Browse & play 
on the iPod

Search & play 
on the iPhone

Search & buy at 
the iTunes Store

Manage it all on the desktop

Figure 3-22. Apple’s many interfaces

There are many less well-known examples. For instance, the Ann Arbor Library supports 
a successful cross-channel search experience. A catalog query on a desktop or mobile 
device offers “Request this title” for each result. Patrons can have books and other items 
shipped to their local branches, and receive email alerts when those items arrive. Pa-
trons can arrange for pickup at the reserve shelf or from a convenient after-hours locker, 
and when an item gets many requests, the library buys more copies—there’s a feedback 
loop that improves results. 

www.it-ebooks.info

v@v
Text Box
Download at WoweBook.com

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior66

Request this title My shelf

Figure 3-23. Cross-channel design at the Ann Arbor District Library

And then there are those things that make us think. For instance, as shown in Figure 
3-24, WineM is a “smart” wine rack made by ThingM that uses radio frequency identifi-
cation (RFID) to track individual bottles in a rack. A mobile device lets users query the 
collection by year, region, type, and price. Full-color LED lights transform the rack and 
bottles into a physical faceted search results interface.

Figure 3-24. WineM’s faceted search interface

In search interaction, the genie is out of the bottle. When we can do so much in and 
out of the box, there’s no going back. But we may come to pine for old limits. While the 
freedom to invent idioms and change channels makes design more interesting, it also 
makes our work more difficult. It’s all too easy to create elaborate, confusing interfaces 
that make our users come unglued. That’s why we must stick to our principles. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Principles of Design 67

PRInCIPlES oF DESIgn
Humans began using pigments such as ochres and iron oxides for colorful body decora-
tion around 400,000 BCE. It took us a bit longer to invent written language (about 5,500 
years ago). Since then, we’ve been creating and combining images, symbols, and words 
to communicate ideas and meaning. We’ve had time to practice design.

Of course, time is the last thing we have when users visit a search interface. In the first 
250 milliseconds, the preattentive variables of size, shape, position, alignment, orienta-
tion, color, and texture have already worked their magic. A well-crafted interface reveals 
its core features and layout to our subconscious before we have time to think.

Shape

Color

Alignment

Figure 3-25. Preattentive variables at the BBC

This magic doesn’t occur naturally. Great interfaces require talented designers who 
know how to use visual hierarchy to organize information and guide action, and who 
appreciate the importance of detail. For instance, early versions of Google’s spellcheck 
stated, “If you didn’t find what you were looking for…” at the top of the page, along with 
the suggested spelling. Nobody noticed it, so Google tested shorter variations such as, 
“Did you mean:” above and below the results—and use increased dramatically.

Designers must also be sensitive to context. In music, for instance, the animated 3D in-
terface of Cover Flow makes sense. It’s fun to flip through colorful covers while listening 
to and searching for our favorite songs and albums. But this sexy design enjoys limited 
play in other categories. It certainly doesn’t belong in web search, where simplicity and 
speed are so vital. As Google’s user experience director, Irene Au, explains:

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior68

“ 	A	lot	of	designers	want	to	increase	the	line	height	or	padding	in	order	to	make	the	interface	‘breathe.?’	We	deliberately	don’t	do	that.?	We	want	to	squeeze	in	as	much	
information	as	possible	above	the	fold.?	We	recognize	that	information	density	is	
part	of	what	makes	the	experience	great	and	efficient.?	Our	goal	is	to	get	users	in	
and	out	really	quickly.?	All	our	design	decisions	are	based	on	that	strategy.?” 2

This statement reveals an important dimension of design. We can’t be concerned solely 
with how an interface looks. As Steve Jobs famously remarked, “Design is how it works.” 
Visual design shapes the first impression and has a lasting impact, but the halo effect 
carries the tune only so far. Interaction design is the missing link that lets the rough 
edges between user and system dissolve in behavior. It’s a discipline essential to flow. 
And it’s a practice that’s relatively new—although we’ve made tools for over a million 
years, we’ve been making interactive software for less than a century. That said, we’ve 
made a good start at defining first principles, and many of them apply directly to search.

InCREmEnTAl ConSTRUCTIon
We can accomplish amazing feats once we overcome fear and inertia at the start line. 
But oftentimes we don’t start. We’re overwhelmed by the enormity of a task or confused 
by the complexity of an interface. These feelings are so widespread that we collect idi-
oms for inspiration. Get the ball rolling. Rome wasn’t built in a day. A journey of a thou-
sand miles begins with a single step. Don’t make me think! Designers should heed these 
words, because search is a terribly common place to stop. A complex interface hits like a 
brick wall. Not only does it make users think, but it also makes them feel stupid, and that’s 
the kiss of death. So, we must recall the paradox of the active user and allow users to start 
small, with a keyword or two. Input hints or prompts near or within the box should show 
the what and the how of search, and the box should boast autocomplete and a forgiving 
format. Why should users worry about spelling and syntax when that’s our job? 

Let’s get them started with good defaults and keep them moving with facets, filters, and 
intriguing branches. We must also support safe exploration by enabling undo, so users 
can modify parameters, step back, or start over. We must work hard to lower search 
costs and reduce barriers to entry, because search isn’t iterative and interactive when 
users stop before they begin. People will build great queries incrementally, one click 
at a time, if we can get them past the start line and always offer at least one next step.

2 “Google’s Irene Au: On Design Challenges,” Business Week (March 18, 2009), www.businessweek.com/innovate/
content/mar2009/id20090318_786470.htm.

www.it-ebooks.info

www.businessweek.com/innovate/content/mar2009/id20090318_786470.htm
www.businessweek.com/innovate/content/mar2009/id20090318_786470.htm
http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Principles of Design 69

Figure 3-26. Forgiving format at Amazon

PRogRESSIvE DISCloSURE
Experience with a tool or task often shifts the optimal balance of power and simplic-
ity. To begin, users don’t want to be overwhelmed with features. But with time, more 
advanced options may be desirable. So, progressive disclosure defers these powerful 
or specialized features to a secondary screen, making software easier to use and learn. 
We must design applications that require the least amount of physical and mental ef-
fort, using contextual tools like hover-reveal to offer an invitation without cluttering the 
interface. 

Google Maps offers a good example of progressive disclosure and careful adherence to 
the user dictate: “Show me only what I want.” The initial interface is a basic map with an 
overlay for popular tasks like getting directions. A click adds a colorful traffic layer and 
a hover reveals more options. Google designs disclosures that are responsive to users.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior70

Figure 3-27. Progressive disclosure in Google Maps

Faceted navigation is a similarly progressive design pattern. Users can begin with a few 
keywords and end with a few results. They can ignore the facets if they choose, but the 
power of incremental query refinement is available, plus the quantity and specificity of 
metadata fields often snowballs helpfully as they go. Facets allow people to learn search 
on gentle slopes rather than being forced into the big step from the bunny hills of the 
basic interface to the black diamond mode of advanced search.

In general, even though progressive disclosure may suggest the use of modes to pre-
vent specialized features from cluttering the basic interface, we must take great care 
when introducing distinct system states like advanced search. Modes often lead to 
mode errors in which users forget the current state, attempt an action belonging in 
another mode, and get an unexpected result. These are not insurmountable problems, 
but it’s often easiest for everyone to rally around a modeless interface. Similarly, it’s best 
to add flexibility with support for deferred choices. Let the user search and then log in 
without losing results. Offering many paths to the same destination effectively supports 
both incremental construction and progressive disclosure. We get two principles for the 
price of one.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Principles of Design 71

Undo

Progressive
disclosure

Figure 3-28. Faceted navigation at the Triangle Research Libraries

ImmEDIATE RESPonSE
Poor performance will turn any interface into a train wreck. Flow requires feedback, 
early and often. A few years ago, results were the only reply. Our goal was a subsecond 
response. Now, with autocomplete and autosuggest, the results may precede the query. 
How’s that for timely feedback? Of course, our systems can’t always deliver, in which 
case we rely on animations, cinematic effects, and other visual transitions to indicate 
progress and enhance engagement. But while transitions advance the perception of 
performance, they’re no substitute for speed, which can improve even a mediocre sys-
tem by enabling iterative, interactive query refinement in response to results.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior72

Volkswagen UK employs a wonderfully subtle form of feedback. During active control 
of a slider, the options to be excluded from the results fade to gray. Then, upon release 
of the mouse button, the faded options disappear, and the remaining cars gracefully 
shift into position within the smaller result set. It takes a while for this rich Internet ap-
plication to load, but once running, it’s a smooth ride with great performance and quick 
response.

Figure 3-29. Immediate response at Volkswagen UK

AlTERnATE vIEwS
For many applications, the optimal view differs by user and task. One size does not fit 
all. This is certainly true in search, where the ideal mix of metadata depends upon user 
intent. A linear list of results rendered in text may work for quick lookup, but compari-
son shopping merits a tabular presentation with images. Conversely, the search for co-
occurrence invites a geographic map with symbolic data overlays. Since we can’t always 
employ the query to accurately interpret intent, it’s important to provide the user with 
choices.

Viewzi takes alternate views to the extreme. This intriguing application provides the ba-
sic choice between small and large images, but it doesn’t stop there. Viewzi offers more 
than 18 different ways to view search results. Options include simple text, image grid, 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Principles of Design 73

timeline, tag cloud, and a fashionable cover flow interface for browsing web screen-
shots. It’s not a model that most should emulate, but it does get us thinking about the 
layouts and lenses we might offer our users.

Simple choice

Complex choice

Figure 3-30. Multiple views with Viewzi

Sort order also provides users with the choice of alternate views. Since users rarely ex-
plore beyond the first page of results, sorts act much like filters. When we sort by most 
popular or best rated, we effectively limit our view by that criteria. On the other hand, 
we sometimes sort by date or title so we can quickly scan the list for a known item. Sort 
order is a relatively easy way to provide users with flexibility and control.

Figure 3-31. Controls for sort order

Another alternate view worth reflection is that of those who can’t see. As with other fea-
tures of an application, search should be universally accessible. Clearly, this means that 
search and result interfaces must be easy to navigate with text-to-speech and Braille out-
put screen readers. It’s also worth considering the content. Google’s Accessible Search, 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior74

for instance, relies upon signals in HTML markup to identify and prioritize search results 
that are easier for blind and visually impaired users to use. As designers, we must make 
content and functionality accessible by adhering to the layered strategy of progressive 
enhancement (or the inverse principle of graceful degradation). It’s our responsibility to 
offer multiple paths to the same information to provide all users with freedom and to 
serve those who lack the basic options many of us take for granted.

PREDICTABIlITy
For most applications, predictability assures usability. Effectiveness, efficiency, and sat-
isfaction generally follow when users can accurately predict what will happen next. In 
search, we need predictable features and results. Controls must be easy to discover and 
understand. The Gap, for instance, uses a simple hover invitation to feed-forward the 
Quick Look feature, which leads to an overlay instead of the detailed product page. 
Since the invite appears in the natural flow of result selection, it’s impossible to miss.

Hover
invitation

Figure 3-32. Hover invitation at The Gap

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Principles of Design 75

In contrast, Bloomberg’s rotate-to-view feature is less discoverable, but once found it 
works well, because it’s simple and consistent. When a gesture works the same way 
throughout an application, habituation improves efficiency. Users become comfortable 
with that gesture and know what to expect. 

Rotate to view chart

Invitation shown on touch

Figure 3-33. Rotate to view at Bloomberg

Consistency of placement is also important. When people use controls, they find and 
recognize them by location. So, in designing search and result interfaces, we must re-
spect the power of spatial memory and position controls and widgets consistently.

Of course, search only works well when results are predictable. First, the box must do 
what’s expected by responding with the right results in good order. Second, each result 
must offer sufficient scent through the right mix of metadata so that users can sense its 
aboutness. We can’t have people wondering what’s hidden behind door number one.

RECognITIon ovER RECAll
Recognition is triggered by context. We’re quite good at it. With the radio on, we can 
sing the lyrics to thousands of songs. Recall works without context. At this, we’re terribly 
bad. With the radio off, our memories fade to black. This imbalance is shared across our 
senses, and it’s a huge factor in design. It’s a major reason why we shifted from CLI to 
GUI. Users couldn’t recall commands, but they could easily recognize buttons and links. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior76

In search, the first step is to make valuable options visible. Otherwise, users forget what 
they can do. This requires compromise with progressive disclosure. We need just the 
right balance between show and hide. Second, we must offer tools that reduce users’ 
short-term memory load. Amazon is the best in this department. While searching, users 
can use a shopping cart, shopping list, and wish list as their personal memory managers. 

But Amazon further boosts our memories by thinking outside the box. Users can drag the 
universal wish list button to their browsers’ toolbars, and then add items to wish lists while 
exploring any online store. Even better, while out and about in the physical world, users 
can tap the Remembers feature of Amazon’s mobile application to snap photos of any-
thing they wish to remember. If the object is a product, Amazon will try to find it and send 
an email alert with a link, then show it on the home page the next time the user visits. It’s a 
truly amazing feature that makes it almost impossible to forget what we intended to buy.

Figure 3-34. Amazon’s memory managers

Of course, sometimes the path to better recognition in search is browse. Search requires 
that we know what we want and have the words to describe our needs. In contrast, browse 
illustrates what’s available, shows the vocabulary, and reminds us of things we might need.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Principles of Design 77

In mobile, browse is especially useful, because it takes time to type and we’re unsure 
what to search for. Applications like Where and AroundMe don’t require users to re-
member the types of things to be found. Instead, we can browse the map or a tradi-
tional taxonomy. We may not recall what we want, but we’ll recognize it when we see it.

Figure 3-35. Mobile browsing with Where and AroundMe

mInImAl DISRUPTIon
In light of our feeble memories, not to mention our general impatience and intolerance 
for change, it’s often best (when possible) to stay on the page. Modern applications 
usually offer such conveniences as same page error messages, edit in place, and contex-
tual help. Overlays, inlays, tabs, virtual scrolling and panning, and inline paging are all 
creative ways to bring additional content and controls into the picture without shifting 
the frame. 

Netflix takes convenience a step further. In addition to a detail overlay, Netflix serves up 
actionable results, so we can add items to the Instant Queue or start playing a movie, all 
without leaving the results page. The controls and features move so we don’t have to.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior78

Figure 3-36. A detail overlay and actionable results at Netflix

DIRECT mAnIPUlATIon
Yet another factor in the success of GUI is the principle of direct manipulation. Inter-
faces that enable users to interact directly with visible objects are more easily learned 
and used. Sometimes we rely on real-world metaphors. We sort files on the desktop 
and drag them into the trash can. Other times, our idioms have no analog, yet direct 
manipulation drives them into our muscle memory. Our bodies remember what our 
minds forget.

At first blush, search has little room for direct manipulation. After all, isn’t the box ground 
zero for the triumphant rebirth of the command line? But upon reflection, we find op-
portunities for tangible results. For instance, Searchme lets users drag results into cus-
tom search stacks for later review or for sharing with friends and colleagues. There’s also 
an Add to Stack link, but it lacks the visual and tactile gratification of drag-and-drop. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Principles of Design 79

Drop
zone

Figure 3-37. Drag results to stacks at Searchme

However, the link also lacks the problems of drag-and-drop. The perceived affordance 
of the link is clear. Predictability is high, and it favors recognition over recall. In contrast, 
there’s no perceived affordance to indicate the results are draggable. Searchme fails to 
provide a self-describing drag handle. It does a better job with the transition and drop 
zone. Upon result selection, the stack area lights up and the result spins and shrinks until 
it’s dropped into place. But this introduces another challenge. The use of drag-and-drop 
invokes Fitts’ Law: the time to acquire a target is a function of the distance to and size of 
the target. This means we must think carefully about the size and placement of the drop 
zone. Many users have a hard time getting the mouse (and cursor or drag handle) into 
just the right place, especially while holding down the mouse button.

The pie menu (also known as a radial menu) is an interesting alternative. A music search 
engine named Songza illustrates the benefits. First, it’s self-revealing. When a user clicks 
on a result, the menu appears. Second, it plays well with Fitts’ Law. The options, includ-
ing those within the nested menus, are near the original point of interaction. Third, it’s a 
gestural interface with the advantages of direct manipulation. Expert users can rely on 
muscle memory to select options without glancing at menus.

Figure 3-38. Songza’s self-revealing pie menu

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 3: Behavior80

Of course, we must consider how these principles of design interact. For instance, the 
pursuit of direct manipulation may compromise accessibility, or our basic controls may 
simply fail the power user. It’s a constant balancing act that can only be done in context.

ConTExT oF USE
In design, context is a seven-letter word that means everything. It’s not enough for our 
applications to work great in the lab; they must succeed in the real world. This means we 
must consider users, goals, content, features, platform, and environment. An elderly man 
with fat fingers may have a hard time using the tiny touch targets of a soft keyboard to 
search for a nearby restaurant while bouncing on a bus. That’s why the iPhone employs 
iceberg tips and adaptive targets to make writing a little easier. It’s also why Google 
Mobile uses search history, autosuggest, and voice search to let us type a little less.

Invisible target area

Iceberg tips
Controls that have a larger 
target area than what’s visible

Adaptive target
Increase to target area
based upon algorithmically
derived guess about the 
next item the user will touch

Figure 3-39. Adaptive solutions on the iPhone

Of course, we’re all making it up as we go along. There’s no sheet music for what we 
do, since each context requires a new song. Interaction elements and design principles 
afford us a basic grammar and vocabulary. We can even string together a lick here and 
there by drawing upon established patterns of design. But, at the end of the day, innova-
tion requires improvisation. We won’t find flow, get in the groove, or create designs that 
dissolve in behavior without embracing the risk of new rhythms. As Louis Armstrong 
once noted, “Never play a thing the same way twice.” It’s time we put the jazz in design.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Design Patterns

“ 	The	design	of	the	garden	lies	within	the	language.?”—Christopher Alexander
A language is a system of symbols and rules to convey ideas and information. We rely on 
natural languages like English, Spanish, and Swahili to communicate with one another. 
We use artificial languages like SQL, Perl, and Java to specify instructions and behavior. 
These language types have much in common, but they differ with respect to rules. Arti-
ficial languages are planned and constructed by an individual or group. Their vocabular-
ies and syntax are precisely defined. In contrast, natural languages emerge and evolve 
in unpremeditated fashion. They’re spoken before they’re written and only later do we 
derive the rules (like “i” before “e” except after “c”), which are riddled with weird excep-
tions because they’re not really rules at all. In fact, “patterns” is a better word. Patterns 
allow for emergence, evolution, and imperfection. We can detect patterns and adapt 
them to our needs. They are free of charge and subject to change. And yet, access does 
not ensure success. Eloquence requires sensitivity to structure and situation. How do our 
patterns work together within specific contexts? And which patterns are we missing?

These are the tough questions we often ignore. While Christopher Alexander is most fa-
mous for his patterns, he’s the first to point out their limits. He notes, “The links between 
the patterns are almost as much a part of the language as the patterns themselves.” He 
argues that how we put the patterns together makes all the difference:

“ 	The	difference	between	prose	and	poetry	is	not	that	different	languages	are	used,	but	that	the	same	language	is	used	differently.?	In	an	ordinary	English	sentence,	
each	word	has	one	meaning,	and	the	sentence	too,	has	one	simple	meaning.?	In	a	
poem,	the	meaning	is	far	more	dense.?	Each	word	carries	several	meanings;	and	the	
sentence	as	a	whole	carries	an	enormous	density	of	interlocking	meanings,	which	
together	illuminate	the	whole.?” 1

Finally, Alexander warns of the dangers of language by invoking the linguistic relativ-
ity of the Whorf hypothesis—the idea that language shapes (and constrains) thought. 
To avoid limiting the solution space, we must give our language sufficient expressive 
power. Even then, when faced with new problems, we must be ready to change the lan-
guage or leave it behind. As Alexander concludes, “This ageless character has nothing, 
in the end, to do with languages. The language, and the processes which stem from it, 

1 A Pattern Language, Christopher Alexander (Oxford University Press).

4

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns82

merely release the fundamental order which is native to us.” The timeless way and the 
quality without a name flow naturally from observing and responding to human be-
havior within an environmental context. The language is a map, but empathy is the key.

As we study the patterns of search, we’d do well to heed these lessons from disciplines 
more storied than ours. After all, the design of search is a new and rapidly evolving 
practice. We’re still working on the basic alphabet, even as we aspire to the poetry of 
language. We design applications that work beautifully, but then struggle to repeat our 
success. Getting the design right and the right design often feels like trying to catch 
lightning in a bottle. That’s because all too often we don’t understand why the design 
works. We search for solutions by trial and error. It’s a long, risky process and sometimes 
there’s no alternative, but often there is a better, more timeless way.

In this chapter, we’ll survey 10 patterns that have emerged as repeatable solutions to 
common problems. Simply identifying and describing each pattern has value, but we 
won’t stop there. We’ll explore how each pattern relates to others and which contexts 
are most suitable to which patterns. Most importantly, we’ll ask why. Why does this pat-
tern work? Why is this a common problem? Why have we selected this solution? In this 
final question, we sow the seeds of innovation. Can we escape the limits of existing 
tools and templates? Is there a better way? Answering this question may require modi-
fying the fundamental system of symbols and patterns that we use to communicate our 
ideas. After all, as the architect said, “The design of the garden lies within the language.”

AUToComPlETE
The autocomplete design pattern is a good place to start. As users type into a text entry 
box, suggestions appear automatically. It’s a pattern that first emerged within the Help 
functions of desktop applications. This solution solves several very common problems. 
First, typing takes time. Second, users can’t spell well. Third, we’re often at a loss for 
words. We simply don’t know or can’t remember the right terms. Since these problems 
are portable, it was only a matter of time before the pattern spread. Autocomplete is 
now a familiar fixture across desktop, web, and mobile platforms (Figure 4-1). 

A major prerequisite of autocomplete is a source of data for suggestions. Classic desk-
top applications rely on an alphabetical index of help topics. Google draws from a user’s 
personal search history and from the collective search behavior of many users (Figure 
4-2). Firefox (also shown in Figure 4-2) taps browsing history and bookmarks. Yahoo! 
steps beyond autocomplete to autosuggest, shown in Figure 4-3, by tapping query 
reformulation data to recommend related queries that need not include the original 
search term.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Autocomplete 83

Figure 4-1. Autocomplete in a desktop application

Figure 4-2. Autocomplete in Google and Firefox

Autocomplete Autosuggest

Figure 4-3. Autocomplete and autosuggest

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns84

Autosuggest can help users to pivot by highlighting alternate concepts and relevant 
verticals. It’s worth noting that while autocomplete and autosuggest are distinct con-
cepts, most applications blend them together for a small footprint. Consequently, in this 
book, we’ve bundled both under the autocomplete pattern.

A pioneer in this area, Yahoo! has also experimented with visual autocomplete, shown in 
Figure 4-4. Sometimes users are able to clarify better with an image than a word.

Figure 4-4. Visual autocomplete

Many websites, such as Apple.com, draw from their product catalogs to suggest Best Bets 
rather than popular queries, allowing users to skip search and go directly to their desti-
nation. Reference sites like Answers.com, shown in Figure 4-5, draw upon a structured 
database to support query disambiguation, helping users to clarify before they search.

Figure 4-5. Autocomplete at Answers.com

On the mobile platform, autocomplete is clearly a natural. Small, shaky keyboards are not 
conducive to text entry, so Google and Yahoo! work overtime to recall past searches, sug-
gest common queries, and recommend popular destinations, all before we’ve typed the 
first word. Of course, autocomplete isn’t the only solution to this common problem—both 
Google and Yahoo! support mobile voice search. We can’t limit ourselves to refinement 
and continuous improvement. We should also strive to innovate with novel approaches 
and complementary solutions. We must think outside the box. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Autocomplete 85

Figure 4-6. Autocomplete in Google and Yahoo! Mobile

For instance, autocomplete isn’t only about typing and spelling. Suggestions help us 
when we’re not sure what to seek. On websites, the information architecture provides 
users with structural and semantic clues that precede and inform the search. Similarly, 
in mobile applications, we use categories and icons to invite users to explore with a 
click. In this way, browse complements search by getting folks started and helping them 
learn what to seek. 

Figure 4-7. Browse options in Citysearch and Dopplr

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns86

In summary, autocomplete is a flexible pattern that works across multiple platforms. 
And, it’s fairly discrete. It can coexist with or function independently of other patterns.

Qu...

Suggestions

DestinationResults

Autocomplete

Figure 4-8. The Autocomplete design pattern

That said, autocomplete can draw suggestions from a Best Bets database and may lever-
age algorithms from the best first pattern. Autocomplete can also work well with scoped 
search and personalized search, since it’s easier to make good suggestions when the 
scope is limited and when we have insight into searcher behavior and intent. However, 
as Figure 4-9 shows, organizations don’t always tune suggestions to a specific category. 
It’s unlikely that “kerosene heater” is a popular query among users looking for books.

Figure 4-9. Autosuggest with scoped search

BEST FIRST
In search, you’re only as good as your first results. While the exact numbers vary by sys-
tem and depend upon the users, the task, and the interface, it’s a safe bet that the top 
three results will draw 80 percent of the attention. The remaining results on the first 
page may each earn a few percentage points. After that, visibility drops off a cliff.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Best First 87

80%

20%

Figure 4-10. Best first with Google

This is important for two reasons. First, surfacing great results satisfies the simplest use 
case for search. Users enter queries, scan the first few results, click a link, and the search 
is complete. Best first is crucial to making search simple, fast, and relevant. Second, the 
first few results inordinately influence query reformulation. Users enter search terms, 
scan and learn from the first few results, and try a different query. For the 25–50 percent 
of search sessions that involve query reformulation, those first three results are a vital 
part of the user interface. What we find changes what we seek.

Consequently, best first must be a top priority during search engine selection. High-
quality, transparent, flexible result-ranking algorithms are critical to success. They must 
be good out of the gate, and they should support tuning to the unique requirements of 
a particular content collection or application. The algorithms should account for:

Relevance
These algorithms focus on topical relevance or aboutness. They aim to match the query 
keywords to the text of the content and metadata. Effective algorithms account for 
term order, proximity, location, frequency, and document length. An exact phrase 
match in a short title is worth more than an AND co-occurrence in a long body. A phrase 
that repeats on a page but is rare on the site merits extra weight. Relevance algorithms 
must also manage the transformation of text queries to account for plurals and other 
word variants (e.g., poet and poetry). Tuning may be required to get the right balance 
of precision and recall. Relevance is typically the default setting and is often in truth 
a hybrid that combines the inputs of multiple algorithms into a balanced solution.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns88

Popularity
In most contexts, social data can deliver a big boost to semantic algorithms. Google’s 
PageRank, which counts links as votes, was the first mainstream success. Today, 
popularity is typically a multialgorithmic measure. At Flickr, a photo’s interestingness 
derives from views, comments, notes, bookmarks, favorites, and so on. At Amazon, 
users can sort by Bestselling or Best Reviews, but even when they sort by relevance, 
social data influences the results.

Date
Sorting by date is rarely a good default, but it is a useful option, especially for news 
and email applications in which reverse chronological order (newest first) is rela-
tively common. In many cases, the date of publication or modification can serve 
as a valuable input into the general-purpose relevance algorithm by improving the 
freshness of top results.

Format
In pure form, format and content type are most useful as filters, allowing users to 
view only images, videos, or news. However, they can also help to boost the best re-
sults. For instance, on an intranet, HTML and PDF documents may be more polished 
than .doc or .xls files. In such cases, application-specific tuning that brings the best 
formats to the top is extremely valuable.

Personalization
A user’s search history, social network, or current location (online or off ) are just a 
few inputs that might influence the order of results. We’ll delve into this topic when 
we explore the personalized search pattern. For now, let’s just note that personaliza-
tion is at least as difficult as it is desirable.

Diversity
In search, it’s easy to get too much of a good thing. Diversity algorithms guard 
against redundant results and support query clarification and refinement by surfac-
ing distinct meanings (e.g., apple and AAPL) and formats. Application-specific tun-
ing delivers the right balance and a nice blend of results.

As designers, we need not understand exactly how these algorithms work, but they 
must be on our requirements list during search engine selection. We must tune them to 
our content or application. Generally, a blended default is in order. Users typically want 
results that are relevant, popular, and timely. A pure sort order, like the one shown in 
Figure 4-11, is a nice option but a poor default. Since The Little Prince is among the most 
popular books ever written, that’s most likely the best first result. But without algorithms 
enhanced by social data, this library database serves up The Little Lame Prince instead.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Best First 89

Figure 4-11. Sort by title ignores popularity

Of course, algorithms aren’t the only way to the top. While we must rely on software and 
distributed user behavior (e.g., tagging, bookmarking) to manage the long tail of search, 
applying centralized editorial effort to suggest Best Bets for the most common queries 
delivers a substantial return on investment. In most cases, the analysis of search query 
data reveals a power law distribution and invites us to apply the 80/20 rule. A small 
number of unique search phrases accounts for a large percentage of total queries. It has 
become a best practice for managers of large websites to integrate a simple database 
that matches these common search phrases to good starting points or destinations. 

Best Bets goes by many names, including Suggested Links, Recommended Results, and 
Editor’s Choice. Figure 4-13 shows that Microsoft also complements the algorithmic re-
sults with related products and downloads. This diversity enables query disambiguation 
by letting users clarify whether they want to buy a product or need support. Clearly, 
there’s also an opportunity for cross-selling and upselling. Best Bets and search analytics 
in general are as useful in marketing circles as they are in the world of user experience.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns90

Figure 4-12. Best Bets at the National Cancer Institute

Figure 4-13. Editor’s Choice at Microsoft

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Federated Search 91

For Best Bets, design considerations include the number and presentation of suggested 
links and their relationship to algorithmic results. Generally, one to three suggestions 
per query is sufficient. Ideally, links that appear as Best Bets are removed from the algo-
rithmic list to avoid wasting valuable space with redundant results. And while it’s not 
necessary to spatially separate the two types of results, in the interest of transparency 
it’s helpful to label the Best Bets and visually distinguish them from the natural results. 

Best First

ResultsQuery

Figure 4-14. The best first design pattern

In short, best first is the most universal and important design pattern in search. Its de-
sign is intertwingled with other patterns. The first few results must satisfy the simple 
lookup and support query clarification and refinement, but those results may appear 
first in autocomplete and may be modified using faceted navigation. Or they may be 
prequalified with advanced or personalized search. Finally, it’s no good delivering the 
best of the worst. It’s impossible for users to find what they need when searching the 
wrong place, which is why we must study the precarious pattern of federated search.

FEDERATED SEARCH
By definition, federated search involves the simultaneous search of multiple databases 
or collections. In intranets, it runs a single query across the staff directory and the sub-
sites of multiple business units. On the Internet, it takes queries where crawlers can’t by 
tapping into dynamic databases of the deep Web. In libraries (Figure 4-15), it lets users 
search multiple catalogs, collections, databases, and websites all at once.

Federated search may be necessary when managing dynamic content from multiple 
sources with different data models, but it does present challenges. First and foremost, 
performance is notoriously slow. As the number and size of collections grow, speed suf-
fers. This is a serious flaw. Plus, the query language may be limited to the lowest com-
mon denominator in the face of disparate vocabularies and data models. Sophisticated 
approaches like faceted navigation may be precluded by federated search.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns92

M
ul

tip
le

 s
ou

rc
es

Figure 4-15. Federated search at the Library of Congress

Figure 4-16. Federated search at Kosmix

www.it-ebooks.info

v@v
Text Box
Download at WoweBook.com

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Federated Search 93

So, before committing to this solution, it’s worth reframing the problem. When con-
tent is scattered into silos, users don’t know where to search. Fragmentation is the root 
cause. Federated search addresses this problem, but it’s not the only way. Instead, we 
can defragment the content by pulling it all into an integrated index. This may enable 
fast, powerful, unified queries, but is it still federated search? At this point, our definition 
needs clarification. Generally, when we talk about “multiple databases or collections,” 
there’s a symmetry between the front and back ends. But this needn’t be true. Mirroring 
the technical architecture within the user experience is a design decision. Is it valuable 
for users to know these resources are from different sources? Is source a more important 
distinction than topic, format, or date? Will users need to define subsets of collections 
to search or execute more powerful queries using the native interfaces of individual 
databases? If the answer to these questions is, “No,” federated search may become an 
antipattern that adds drag to the back end and visual clutter to the front.

That said, federated search can serve as a stepping stone by helping people visualize 
and play with possible and desirable outcomes. At the Library of Congress, the prospect 
of a single search across multiple collections was met with some skepticism. Federated 
search was a first step to get the ball rolling. However, the very next step may involve 
moving beyond federated search by unifying indexes and embracing a faceted naviga-
tion user interface that emphasizes topic and format more than source. Similarly, the 
alpha version of Boxee (shown in Figure 4-17) is an intriguing first step. Boxee is a social 
media center that supports multiple sources and formats of videos, music, and pictures 
from desktop computers, broadcast networks, and the Internet. It’s a web-based service 
designed for big-screen television, and it’s a radically federated solution that makes us 
think differently about how we might find and share media in the not-so-distant future. 
Boxee is also pretty difficult to use, in part because it spotlights sources rather than 
focusing on user-friendly ways to search and browse. It’s a stepping stone, not a bridge.

In summary, federated search is important because users don’t know where to search. 
Whenever content is fragmented into multiple locations, this pattern merits discussion. 
However, it’s important to focus on the goal, not fixate on the pattern. If it’s possible to 
unify the indexes, that may be the right solution, even if it’s not technically federated 
search.

If source isn’t relevant to users, there’s no need to highlight it in the results. It may suffice 
to list source on the detail pages or include it as a metadata field within the faceted navi-
gation display. Indeed, federated search must be carefully integrated with other pat-
terns. Autocomplete and best first will need to draw suggestions from multiple sources. 
Advanced search may enable database selection, while the complementary modes of 
ask and browse may be harder to align across multiple sites. But no pattern is more 
closely tied to federated search than faceted navigation, since it offers users a great way 
to see and select sources within an integrated model of clarification and refinement.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns94

Figure 4-17. The alpha version of Boxee

Federated Search

Query Results

Figure 4-18. The federated search design pattern

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Faceted Navigation 95

FACETED nAvIgATIon
Also called guided navigation and faceted search, the faceted navigation model lever-
ages metadata fields and values to provide users with visible options for clarifying and 
refining queries. Faceted navigation is arguably the most significant search innovation 
of the past decade.2 It features an integrated, incremental search and browse experi-
ence that lets users begin with a classic keyword search and then scan a list of results. It 
also serves up a custom map (usually to the left of results) that provides insights into the 
content and its organization and offers a variety of useful next steps. That’s where facet-
ed navigation proves its power. In keeping with the principles of progressive disclosure 
and incremental construction, users can formulate the equivalent of a sophisticated 
Boolean query by taking a series of small, simple steps. Faceted navigation addresses 
the universal need to narrow. Consequently, this pattern has become nearly ubiquitous 
in e-commerce, given the availability of structured metadata and the clear business val-
ue of improving product findability. Faceted navigation is being deployed rapidly across 
an impressively wide variety of contexts and platforms. In the world of search, faceted 
navigation is everywhere.

Figure 4-19 illustrates a successful implementation of faceted navigation as a model 
for interacting with the catalogs of several academic libraries. This is a good example 
of a federated search in which source (roughly equivalent to location) is deemphasized 
relative to subject and format. The consortium’s goal is to connect students and faculty 
with the best materials, regardless of which university owns them. This example also 
hints at the design challenges. Faceted navigation is not simply a feature to check off a 
list. Success requires painstaking attention to detail and an appreciation for the vast ar-
ray of possibilities for interaction design. For instance, the libraries run collapsible facets 
down the left. Only the most relevant facets (subject, format, location) are open. Most 
are closed by default. Each open facet reveals only the top four or five most heavily 
populated values. This allows for a small facet footprint that frees up plenty of space 
on the main stage for the results themselves. The number of matching results for each 
value (shown within parentheses) is a key element of the map, as is the reformulation 
of search terms and selected values as stacking breadcrumbs, which let users view and 
modify their current search parameters. This interface is the result of user research, us-
ability testing, and iterative design. But it’s not the only way.

2 Marti Hearst and her Flamenco project collaborators at UC Berkeley deserve credit for their pioneering research in 
faceted navigation (http://flamenco.berkeley.edu/).

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns96

Figure 4-19. Searching library catalogs with faceted navigation

For instance, applications rely on a mix of scented widgets for viewing and interacting 
with facet values, and some shift facet selectors to the top or right rather than the left. 

Figure 4-20. A variety of scented widgets

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Faceted Navigation 97

Presenting facets along the top draws added attention to the narrowing facility. Given 
massive result sets, this is an effective way to highlight the data structure and draw 
users into filtering. Top placement may sometimes obscure results and cause clutter, 
but can work well with image collections like Artist Rising (Figure 4-21) or when only 
a few facets are needed. It’s often useful to allow for flexibility in the number of facets 
displayed. As shown in Figure 4-22, adaptive facets let controls conform to the content 
as users shift between categories and drill down within collections. This may be a reason 
to avoid facets on top. While less visible, facets on the right can work, too, assuming they 
appear to be controls rather than ads and don’t get cut off by narrow browsers. When 
in doubt, lean toward the de facto standard (left side) and subject different designs to 
user research and testing.

Facets

Search within

Expand

Sort

Figure 4-21. Faceted navigation puts metadata on the map

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns98

Limited facets after 
initial search.

Rich facets upon 
selecting a category.

Figure 4-22. Amazon’s adaptive facets

In contrast to the relatively mature design space of the desktop Web, mobile is a platform 
where standards for faceted navigation have yet to emerge. A few research projects such 
as FaThumb3 have explored the challenges and possibilities of facet-based interfaces for 
mobile search. Clearly, tiny screens preclude the established model. There’s insufficient 
space to present facets and values alongside results. Ever the pioneer, Amazon is among 
the first to design a mainstream application that adds faceted navigation to mobile 
search. As Figure 4-23 shows, it features an iterative model that requires more steps 
than ideal, but it’s a move in the right direction. As mobile search crosses the chasm, 
users will expect the features and functions to which they’ve become accustomed on 
the desktop, and first and foremost outside of the box, they will absolutely, positively 
need to narrow.

3 A facet-based interface for mobile search. Available at http://research.microsoft.com/apps/pubs/default.aspx?id=64303.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Faceted Navigation 99

Figure 4-23. Faceted navigation on Amazon Mobile

Across all platforms, there are some qualifications and questions worth review. First, 
we’ve been using the term “faceted navigation” rather loosely. Formal definitions of fac-
ets may exclude simple fields and filters, but discrimination is unwarranted in practice, 
provided that filters operate independently and users can add or remove them in arbi-
trary order in concert with the updating of results. 

On the other hand, the distinction between faceted navigation and parametric search 
is relevant. In parametric search applications, users specify their search parameters up 
front using a variety of controls such as checkboxes, pull-downs, and sliders to con-
struct what effectively is an advanced Boolean query. Unfortunately, it’s hard for users 
to set several parameters at once, especially since many combinations will produce 
zero results. 

Today, it’s rare to see pure parametric search, but many applications lean closer to that 
end of the spectrum than they should. For example, Snooth fails to indicate the number 
of matching results until after users execute a refined search. The widgets are decidedly 
unscented and the interface encourages users to modify multiple parameters before 
query execution. It’s a solution that’s hard on people but soft on hardware. In other 
words, it’s an unfortunate compromise that sacrifices immediate response to reduce 
the server load.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns100

Figure 4-24. Parametric problems at Snooth

At the other extreme, live search applications like Volkswagen UK (Figure 4-25) and 
Kayak (Figure 4-26) update results dynamically with no submit button and no page re-
fresh. There are some real advantages to this dynamic model, which allows for immedi-
ate response, minimal disruption, and elegant transitions. But there are also costs. The 
Volkswagen UK application takes time to load, and Kayak must use a conspicuous (and 
somewhat awkward) overlay to call attention to the updated results. Live search appli-
cations are like dangerously quiet hybrid vehicles. When the noise disappears, we find 
it had value. Elegant transitions can reintroduce some useful disruption, but in cases 
where both results and facets change simultaneously, this becomes a bit tricky.

Figure 4-25. Immediate response at Volkswagen UK

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Faceted Navigation 101

Figure 4-26. Live search at Kayak

Of course, as design and technology evolve in concert, we will solve these problems 
even as new challenges arise. Processors grow faster; people don’t. So, we’ll need to 
carefully manage transitions. Meanwhile, faceted navigation will surely adapt to every 
context and platform because the need to narrow exists at the crossroads of behavior 
and the box.

Faceted Navigation

ResultsQuery Results

Figure 4-27. The faceted navigation design pattern

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns102

Faceted navigation is a master pattern. Its deployment impacts all other search patterns 
and the information architecture as a whole. To oversimplify, there’s the Google model 
and the faceted navigation model. Choosing between these two is a major strategic deci-
sion. Determining whether or not faceted navigation is sensible and feasible is among 
the earliest steps in design. The infrastructure for faceted navigation can enable a tighter 
relationship between search and browse. It can shape the structure and navigation of 
the entire site or application. It also changes how we think about autocomplete and best 
first. It offers a familiar framework for managing the sources of federated search. Plus, its 
discriminatory power to clarify intent and refine results may offset the need for person-
alization and advanced search. That said, faceted navigation won’t work everywhere. For 
starters, it’s an expensive proposition. The demands on search software and servers are 
substantial. Also, the metadata infrastructure involves both initial investment and on-
going expense. For these reasons and more, a simpler search model is sometimes better, 
but it must often be supplemented by advanced search.

ADvAnCED SEARCH
A relative concept, advanced search includes whatever simple search doesn’t. It’s a 
pattern that many of us love to hate. Often, advanced search is a clumsy add-on that’s 
rarely used, and it lets engineers and designers take the easy way out. Valuable features 
that are difficult to integrate into the main interface can be relocated to the ghetto and 
forgotten. Plus, there’s confusion about its purpose. Is it a user-friendly query builder 
for novices or a power tool for experts? Many interfaces try (and fail) to be both. For 
instance, isn’t it fair to assume that users who understand what “exact phrase” means 
also know to use quotation marks to specify such a search? The main problem with 
Boolean isn’t the syntax, it’s the logic. And even the plain language shown in Figure 4-28 
is unlikely to help the few novices who brave the intimidating realm of advanced search.

Figure 4-28. Advanced search at Genentech

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Advanced Search 103

This pattern also suffers from an ignorance of context. Searches are situated. They take 
place in a space. Having navigated through music to the folk genre, users may want to 
search without leaving. Scoped search is a pattern that meets this need. There’s a risk 
that users won’t see the scope, but overrides in the case of few or no results can help. 
In most cases, users benefit, because scoped search caters to context. In contrast, ad-
vanced search often teleports us to a distant, unfamiliar locale. It’s disruptive to flow.

Interestingly, Exalead, shown in Figure 4-29, combines help and advanced search with-
out asking users to leave. A click on Advanced Search launches an interactive menu 
below the box. It’s unconventional and a little clumsy, but definitely worth a look.

Figure 4-29. Exalead’s integrated Help and Advanced Search

Despite these difficulties, advanced search isn’t only an antipattern. It does help 
some users learn about the available metadata fields and vocabularies, and offers a 
path toward greater precision through field-specific searching. Plus, even when we 
reject the advanced/basic dichotomy and build robust functionality into the main 
interface, and strive to support contextual queries with scoped search, it’s inevitable 
that some features that are useful for some tasks and for some people will be left out. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns104

In fact, we should worry if they’re not. Advanced search offers a safe harbor for edge 
cases and a clear path to progressive disclosure. For instance, Flickr includes features in 
advanced search, like limit by license, that simply don’t belong on the main stage.

Figure 4-30. Part of Flickr’s advanced search interface

Of equal import, advanced search in concept, if not by name, gets us to think outside 
the box. What’s the basic interface missing? How else might users wish to search? These 
are the questions that lead to innovations like Midomi’s search by singing, GazoPa’s dis-
cover by drawing, and Etsy’s fabulously fun feature, explore by color.

Figure 4-31. Etsy’s explore by color

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Personalization 105

In conclusion, advanced search is a pattern on the edge. In practice, it’s often abused 
and rarely used. It can be rendered unnecessary by the narrowing and scoping of fac-
eted navigation and personalization. Yet, like federated search, it invites us to go fur-
ther in our search for ideas, and serves as a forgiving playground for experiments and 
exploration.

Advanced Search

NOT

OR

AND Results

Figure 4-32. The advanced search design pattern

PERSonAlIzATIon
If you’ve seen the bow tie–wearing butler in Apple’s 1987 Knowledge Navigator vid-
eo, you know that personalization has been the future of search for decades. Software 
agents that know what we already know and what we want to know will scour the four 
corners of the earth for the data that makes a difference. It’s a compelling vision that’s 
entirely unrealistic absent a quantum leap in science and technology that enables com-
puters to tap directly into our minds and memories (and understand the meaning of 
what they find).

So, while it’s a worthy ambition, personalization is a hard problem. This inconvenient 
truth is often obscured by semantics and spin. For starters, personalization is often con-
fused with customization, a simpler model in which users can explicitly modify settings. 
Customization lets us change color and layout and subscribe to feeds. My Yahoo! and 
iGoogle are popular examples. Of course, in most applications, users mostly fail to cus-
tomize. They’re too busy. They live with defaults. So designers who count on custom-
ization as a crutch will fall flat on their faces. Then there’s the spin. Lots of folks have a 
vested interest in selling the magic of personalization. Enterprise search vendors use it 
for product differentiation. Web search companies harness it as a Trojan horse to sneak 
behind firewalls with their targeted ads. After all, it’s much easier to use demographic 
and behavioral data to sell advertising than to improve search, but users will only share 
their data in return for the promise of better results. And if it’s hard for a company like 
Google, which employs the best and brightest and enjoys unparalleled access to behav-
ioral data, how realistic is it for most sites and applications to personalize search?

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns106

OK, enough with the caveats and criticism. Personalization is a pattern worth study. Sim-
ple solutions are already well established, and the more sophisticated experiments in 
similarity computation and social search are intriguing to say the least. Autocomplete is 
a simple example. As repeat queries are common in many contexts, using search history 
to inform suggestions is often a good idea. Result reranking based on past post-query 
behavior is a more complex challenge. A user who repeats a query is likely to click the 
same result as before. Is it helpful to bring that result to the top? It’s worth asking—that 
is, if we have the behavioral data and the technology to support analysis and action. 

Otherwise, we may find the right balance by employing recommendation engines to 
search for similarity. The most famous of these is Amazon’s “Customers Who Bought 
This Item Also Bought This” feature. It’s not perfect. It’s heavily influenced by publication 
date, since we often buy unrelated books together that are popular at the same time. 
It’s not personalization but a form of collaborative filtering that’s centered on an item, 
not an individual. But it does encourage pearl growing, and it’s a repeatable solution 
to a common problem. It’s a great search pattern, and music recommendation services 
like Last.fm have successfully interwoven this approach with individual preferences and 
similar tastes. Sometimes, personalization really does work like magic.

Figure 4-33. Support for pearl growing at Amazon

But Amazon’s true personalization is less useful and less used than its collaborative fil-
ters. Mining search, navigation, and purchase history to derive helpful, personalized 
suggestions isn’t easy. Results are skewed when we shop for others and buy a bra for 
grandma. But that’s not the crux of the matter. The core problem is that what we wanted 
yesterday or last year often fails to predict our interests and wishes today and tomorrow.

How can software know what we need now? In search, the query affords a peek at 
intent. History may offer a hint, and we may improve results with a little help from 
our friends. In fact, social search is a major area of inquiry in academic circles and an 
intriguing, albeit immature, pattern in practice. At LinkedIn, results are sorted by de-
grees of separation. Answers from friends are followed by those from friends of a friend 
(Figure 4-35). 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Personalization 107

Figure 4-34. Personalization at Amazon

Figure 4-35. Social search at LinkedIn

At Twitter, search ignores our friends. Results are sorted solely by time. In contrast, 
FriendFeed lets us limit queries to our social networks. And therein lies the question: can 
the personal insights and experience of our friends beat the wisdom of the crowd? The 
answer is, of course, it depends. The size and composition of the network is a key vari-
able. So is the nature of the question. A tightly knit circle of teenagers may rely heavily 
on social search for music, fashion, and restaurant recommendations, but similar search-
es may fall flat for a diverse, international network of executives. For some questions, 
our friends know us best, but for most queries, there’s strength in numbers.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns108

Figure 4-36. Social searches on Twitter and FriendFeed

So, it’s worth asking again: how can software know what we need now? The mobile 
platform has part of the answer in the form of location awareness. Our current location, 
in concert with a query (or selection of an application), offers insight into intent and 
a smart default for sort order. Indeed, even our choice of platform is a clue. A desktop 
query for “vegetarian” is likely a lookup, but on the iPhone, a local search for restaurants 
is a good guess. Google Mobile plays it safe by covering both angles. Similarly, simply 
launching SitorSquat (Figure 4-37) clearly indicates searcher intent: find me the nearest 
public toilet, stat!

In the digital domain, using the entry point for search as an input for personalization 
is also an area of inquiry. The most obvious solution is scoped search, covered under 
the advanced search pattern. Less obvious is an idea popularized by John Battelle and 
shown in Figure 4-38. If we know where a user came from or how he got here, can we 
further personalize his experience by embedding recommendations within each result? 
This extension to contextual search is hardly a pattern, but it’s an interesting question 
to ponder.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Personalization 109

Figure 4-37. Personalizing search by location

Figure 4-38. Searchblog’s personalized referrals

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns110

In short, personalization is a dish best served simple. Only in limited contexts will past 
performance predict desired future results. The query is the clearest and most timely 
signal of intent. It’s a concise expression of what users need right now. History, social 
data, and location (online and off ) can sometimes boost that signal, but for practical 
and ethical reasons, these personal algorithms should be transparent and open to over-
ride. When it works, personalization can play well with other patterns. In particular, it in-
forms the suggestions of autocomplete and the algorithms of best first. Often, however, 
personalization must take a back seat to explicit, dynamic customization in the form 
of faceted navigation. After all, interactions with facets are the closest we come to the 
reference interview and what Google cofounder Sergey Brin calls the ultimate personal-
ized search engine: the librarian.

Personalization

Document

Query

Results

Figure 4-39. The personalization design pattern

PAgInATIon
How should we display search results? The next few patterns seek an answer. Since most 
queries produce too many results for one screen, pagination is a common solution. 
Google established the most popular pattern in the form of 10 blue links. And while 
competitors such as Microsoft’s Bing are busy decrying the end of this model, it’s still 
alive and kicking as the dominant standard across desktop, web, and mobile platforms.

Of course, the 10 blue links don’t really stand alone. Google’s results page is a complex, 
high-density interface. Designers are forced to count every pixel, because every pixel 
counts. Features include format filters along the top, dual boxes for query refinement, a 
variety of tools and advanced search options, invitations to explore related searches, 
and a pagination control for accessing paged content. Last but not least, there are 
snippets.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Pagination 111

Figure 4-40. Ten blue links

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns112

Snippets are the heart and soul of search results. To pinch a phrase from multitouch, 
the content is the interface. The snippet reveals the aboutness of each result while also 
serving as the link to live and cached versions and to similar results. A purple link means 
you’ve already visited, an important and helpful clue for determining the next click. 
The two lines of text are selected for optimal scent. They provide a concise summary 
of the result or a brief excerpt with the keywords in context. A URL offers hints about 
the source and subject of the result. And throughout the snippet, query keywords are 
highlighted to reveal the reason for inclusion. That’s a lot of work for a simple snippet.

Figure 4-41. A Google snippet

Bing, shown in Figure 4-42, takes snippets a step further by presenting additional text 
and links from the destination site whenever a user hovers over a particular search 
result.

Figure 4-42. Bing’s preview feature

Of course, the anatomy of a snippet must adapt to fit each platform, format, and context. 
In mobile, snippets must be short. In reference and news and enterprise applications, 
URLs may be useless. And for images and video, a picture’s worth a thousand words.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Pagination 113

Figure 4-43. Snippet diversity

A linear list isn’t the only way to organize results. As Figure 4-44 illustrates, the television 
and movie discovery service Jinni uses size (and layout) to show sort order.

Figure 4-44. Size by rating at Jinni

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns114

In e-commerce, photos of each product are important. So is choice. At Yahoo! Shop-
ping, users can choose whether they see 15, 30, or 45 results in list or grid view. They 
also have a wide variety of sort options and can select multiple items for a side-by-side 
comparison.

Figure 4-45. Result customization at Yahoo! Shopping

Despite all this flexibility, disruption is an inherent problem of pagination. When users 
advance to the next set of results, the page refresh often disrupts flow. Inline paging is 
one solution. At Endless.com, for instance, when users advance to the next result page, 
the old snippets fade out and new ones appear. The rest of the interface stays stable. 
The user feels like she never leaves the page. However, after scrolling down through 
results, there’s still a disconcerting jump from page bottom to top. Nothing’s perfect!

Inline paging

Figure 4-46. Inline paging at Endless.com

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Pagination 115

Several solutions are currently employed in mobile. Apple’s iTunes offers to Show 25 
More at the end of each list. Amazon abolishes paging with virtual scrolling. Progressive 
loading ensures that the first few results are shown immediately, then, as users scroll 
down, more results load automatically. Kayak appears to load all matching flights, but 
sort and filter options are available to refine results and avoid endless scrolling. 

Figure 4-47. Mobile pagination patterns

Infinite scroll and inline paging offer clear benefits, but they come at a cost. First, they’re 
simply more expensive to implement. Second, they may initially confuse users who have 
become used to the standard model. Third, they may frustrate attempts to bookmark or 
share a link to a specific set of results. Don’t forget the power of the page!

Clearly, the pattern of pagination is linked to the composition of the snippet. We must 
find a balance between the richness of each snippet and the number of results per page. 
That is, unless our application affords the freedom to try something unorthodox, like a 
zooming user interface (ZUI) that positions all results within an infinite virtual desktop. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns116

Figure 4-48. Hard Rock’s zooming user interface

In summary, careful attention to pagination delivers results. That’s the bottom line. Snip-
pets are central, serving as both content and interface. But one snippet will not fit all. 
The ideal composition is shaped by platform, format, and context. Flexible sort and filter 
options are also important. While best first defines the default, users deserve control. 
That’s the genius of faceted navigation. Incremental clarification and refinement reduce 
results until the need for paging and scrolling virtually disappears.

Pagination

ResultsQuery

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Next Page

Figure 4-49. The pagination design pattern

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Structured Results 117

STRUCTURED RESUlTS
Increasingly, our uniform ranks of ordered blue links are being infiltrated by rich snip-
pets and structured results that dig deeper into the data so users don’t have to. Google 
made this mainstream by embedding maps, images, stock charts, and more into its 
results. Google also experiments perpetually with options like timeline view and with 
new projects like Google Public Data, which makes it easy to find and visually compare 
statistical data. 

Figure 4-50. Google’s structured results

What’s the optimal format for this type of result? Will a classic snippet suffice, or is there 
a better way? Can we summarize or surface data with an image or chart? Can we sub-
tract clicks by adding answers? These are the questions we must ask. Of course, users’ 
queries are important, too, since the desired output may depend upon structured input. 
It’s a model that only works well when we can reliably infer user intent.

It’s also a pattern that challenges boundaries. When is search not a search? When it’s a 
calculator or a dictionary or an application we have yet to define. Wolfram Alpha strays 
well outside the box. Natural language queries and curated data are subjected to lin-
guistic analysis and computation. Results include tables, charts, formulas, visualiza-
tions, and dynamic controls. It’s not really a search engine at all; it’s a computational 
knowledge engine. Its results are meant to be answers. But where do we draw the line?

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns118

Figure 4-51. Wolfram Alpha’s structured results

On the search side, subtle visualizations invite attention and analysis. At Newssift, shown 
in Figure 4-52, emphasis is placed on identifying patterns, trends, and relationships. It’s 
about the discovery of meaning. Structure isn’t a function of individual answers; rather, 
it’s a way to understand and manage large sets of results.

Figure 4-52. Visual facet widgets at Newssift

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Structured Results 119

Meanwhile, the distinctions between analytics, business intelligence, decision support, 
text mining, and exploratory search continue to blur. Powerful queries and visualiza-
tions that were limited to structured data are being applied to multiformat collections 
and unstructured text. Endeca, for instance, is pioneering an approach called guided 
summarization (shown in Figure 4-53), which integrates faceted navigation with dynam-
ic visualizations that engage users in a rich dialog with their data. While search may still 
start in a box, the potential applications of modern tools are all over the map.

Figure 4-53. Endeca’s guided summarization

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns120

In summary, structure is reshaping our results. Search applications are simply better 
when they swap a picture for a thousand words or take users one step deeper into the 
data. And this pattern plays well with others. While rich snippets may not appear in 
autocomplete, they’re often part of best first. Features like movies, maps, and weather 
surely benefit from personalization, and faceted navigation offers a good model for 
managing text as structured data. Of course, when the response is an answer or a new 
frame for our question, we must wonder: is this really what we talk about when we talk 
about search?

Structured Results

MapQuery

Figure 4-54. The structured results design pattern

ACTIonABlE RESUlTS
But enough talk already. We want action. We need results. That’s what actionable results 
are all about. Why list a link when we can lend a hand? First, we must ask what users 
want to do with their results. The most common tasks are print, save, and share. 

Yahoo! Search Pad (Figure 4-55) manages them all. It’s a handy application that tracks 
the results we visit. We can add notes, print, save, and share the annotated list of search 
results via Delicious, Facebook, Twitter, or by using a custom URL. Searchme pioneered 
a more visual model with similar functionality (Figure 4-56), which lets users drag and 
drop results into shareable search stacks.

www.it-ebooks.info

v@v
Text Box
Download at WoweBook.com

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Actionable Results 121

Figure 4-55. Yahoo! Search Pad

Drop
zone

Figure 4-56. Drag results to stacks at Searchme

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns122

Users may also wish to vote, rate, and comment on results. This is clearly a core feature 
of Digg, a social news website that proves the power of actionable results. As founder 
Kevin Rose explained, “Once we added Ajax, activity went through the roof…the ease 
of the ‘one-click and you’re done’ made all the difference in the world.” Google is now 
experimenting with this type of feature. When signed into Google, users can remove, 
promote, or comment upon individual results. For now, it’s considered a personalization 
feature, but Google is surely storing the social data with an eye toward public results.

Figure 4-57. Actionable results at Digg and Google

Tools that help users to manage results are a good idea, but we can often do better by 
seeing the goal beyond the search. Hulu, for instance, doesn’t simply list results. There’s 
a play button in every snippet, so we can watch TV shows and movies with a single click.

Figure 4-58. A single click to play at Hulu

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Actionable Results 123

Yahoo! has integrated structured and actionable results into its main search experience 
by presenting expanded snippets for top results when possible. This strategy fits nicely 
with the best first pattern. As Figure 4-59 illustrates, music fans are able to play songs 
and watch videos without leaving the results page.

Figure 4-59. Actionable results at Yahoo!

Similarly, Spotlight Search on the iPhone isn’t just a way to find files fast. It’s also an ef-
ficient and elegant way to launch applications and make phone calls. Google Mobile 
goes a step further by integrating single-click phone and map features. And Apple’s 
iTunes lets us play songs and buy music without having to leave our results.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns124

Figure 4-60. Actionable results in mobile applications

In short, actionable results are the next step for users and for search. We must stay fo-
cused on the goal and design for results beyond results. Clearly, this pattern can be 
integrated with most others. For instance, actions can begin with autocomplete. On the 
iPhone, users can launch an application before the query is whole. It’s good to get an 
early start. The real trick is knowing where to end. Do we embed the basic features of 
other applications in our search software? Do we create hooks from our results into oth-
er software that offers a more robust feature set? Implementation is tricky, but it’s worth 
the extra effort, because real-world goals require that we think and act outside the box.

Action

ResultQuery Results

Actionable Results

Figure 4-61. The actionable results design pattern

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Unified Discovery 125

UnIFIED DISCovERy
Search rarely stands alone. In most contexts, users move between modes of searching, 
browsing, and asking. They don’t bother about borders. We can learn from their example 
by embracing the pattern of patterns known as unified discovery. Sometimes it’s about 
making the modes work together. Other times it’s about merging modes. For instance, 
Yahoo! Glue Pages are specialized, visually appealing, browsable search results. They’re 
Google and Wikipedia, gateway and destination, search and browse all rolled into one.

Figure 4-62. A Yahoo! Glue Page

We’re also making browse more like search. At Lands’  End, there’s little difference be-
tween search results and a gallery page (see Figure 4-63) that results from browse. Pagi-
nation and the sort and display options are handled the same way. Plus, even as we 
browse the product taxonomy, faceted navigation options appear to the left. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns126

Figure 4-63. Blending browse and search at Lands’ End

Unfortunately, Lands’  End fails to integrate modes in other important ways. There’s no 
scoped search, so we can’t limit our queries to women’s sweaters or boys’ shoes. And, 
although it does offer a useful Live Help feature, the collaboration is hindered because, 
as Figure 4-64 shows, we can’t easily share our results with the representative.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Unified Discovery 127

Figure 4-64. Live Help at Lands’ End

One way to make the modes work together is by leveraging category matches. When a 
user’s query partially or exactly matches a category label, we have a choice. One option, 
shown in Figure 4-65, is to highlight the category match and present results as usual. 
That’s a reasonable solution for a partial match. However, users may not notice the cat-
egory link or understand what it represents. An alternative is to jump to the category 
page, also shown in Figure 4-65. This requires an exact match or the ability to map a near 
match onto a single category. In such cases, an override option that lets users run their 
original query is helpful, since the category page may not always be the desired result.

A third option is evident at Amazon (shown in Figure 4-66), where category matches are 
integrated as facets to the left of results. This is a balanced solution that keeps the user 
in search while leveraging the structure of the browsable taxonomy.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns128

Partial category match
“shower chair”

Exact category match
“showers”

Figure 4-65. Matching categories at Home Depot

Of course, Amazon is the champion when it comes to making search and browse work 
together. As Figure 4-67 shows, while we browse departments, scoped search offers to 
limit our queries to that section. At Amazon, whether we search or browse first, we can 
always switch to the other mode without losing our place.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Unified Discovery 129

Figure 4-66. Category match at Amazon

Figure 4-67. Scoped search at Amazon

Unified discovery provides a framework in which to integrate patterns. For each search 
pattern, we should ask how it might relate to browse. Autocomplete and best first might 
automatically feature category matches. Personalized search may be informed by our 
current location and browsing history. And, of course, the key fields and filters of faceted 
navigation should be aligned with categories and the overall information architecture.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 4: Design Patterns130

Unified Discovery

Ask

Filter

Query

Search Browse

Results

Figure 4-68. The unified discovery design pattern

THE EnD oF THE BEgInnIng
In this chapter, we’ve explored 10 major search patterns. It’s a start, but our inventory 
isn’t nearly complete. Christopher Alexander and his colleagues compiled 253 architec-
tural patterns for houses, gardens, neighborhoods, and villages. We’re not even close. 
Our best patterns have yet to emerge, and we’re in dire need of a map that shows how 
they fit together. The task is particularly difficult because our patterns are such a motley 
crew. Some fall squarely within the boxes of interaction design or information architec-
ture, while others are boundary spanners that blur the lines between user experience, 
content strategy, knowledge management, and search. These patterns run the gamut 
from tactical to strategic, and therein lies our challenge: we must pay attention to spell-
ing and syntax while simultaneously telling a good story. The writing doesn’t always 
come easy. In fact, we’re often at a loss for words. Our vocabulary for designing and 
describing interactions is limited and limiting. It imprisons our imagination. We can do 
better, so we must seek new words and weave them together most densely, because:

in	search	

as	in	poetry,

less	is	more,

patterns	slow	time,

and	discovery	springs

from	rhythm	and	rhyme.?

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Engines of Discovery

“ 	Let	your	hook	always	be	cast.?	In	the	pool	where	you	least	expect	it,	there	will	be	fish.?”—Ovid
Serendipity refers to an accidental yet desirable discovery. It plays a surprising role. 
Alexander Fleming’s failure to disinfect cultures of bacteria before leaving for vacation 
led to the discovery of penicillin. Archimedes figured out how to measure the volume of 
irregularly shaped objects by taking a bath. And Columbus found America by sailing for 
India. LSD, Uranus, Viagra, safety glass, infrared radiation, microwave ovens, inkjet print-
ers, Corn Flakes, and chocolate chip cookies are all accidental discoveries. It’s amazing 
what we find while searching for something else. In fact, search and serendipity often 
travel together. Discovery requires that we move beyond what we know. Ironically, the 
most frustrating journeys can lead to the best and least expected destinations. As the 
dictionary evangelist Erin McKean remarked, “Serendipity is when you find things you 
weren’t looking for because finding what you are looking for is so damned difficult.”

This reveals a tension in search between relevance and interestingness. The most inter-
esting (and valuable) results aren’t always the most relevant. Often, the best answers lie 
just beyond the edges of what we know to seek. In this ambiguity lies the promised land 
of personalization, collaborative filtering, recommender systems, and discovery en-
gines. But software algorithms take us only so far. We must also rely on an idiosyncratic 
mix of subscriptions and memberships that veil the signal in noise. And, of course, ex-
posure to the right publications and discussions is only half the puzzle. Insight requires 
that we make strange connections that bridge contexts and categories. It’s easy to copy 
from competitors, but mapping an e-commerce feature to the unique requirements of 
mobile social search requires vision and ingenuity. Colorful stories and surprising ex-
amples pave the path to serendipity, but our minds are the real engines of discovery.

5

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 5: Engines of Discovery132

CATEgoRy
Earlier, we defined the primary categories of search as web, e-commerce, enterprise, 
desktop, mobile, social, and real time. Mostly, we labor within one of these boxes, but 
that doesn’t mean we can’t learn from the others. For instance, IBM offers an inspiring 
case study in applying ideas across categories. In the earliest days of Web 2.0, folks at 
IBM saw the potential of social software to transform knowledge management within 
the enterprise. Long before Enterprise 2.0 entered our vocabulary, researchers at IBM 
had rolled out Dogear, an enterprise-class social bookmarking and tagging tool simi-
lar to Delicious. The intranet team also deployed blogs, wikis, and the award-winning 
BluePages employee directory. While executives at other firms fretted about the dan-
gers of tagging, IBM’s w3 was successfully increasing the productivity, collaboration, 
and innovation of its massive global workforce. The IBM team also launched an enter-
prise social search project to harness all that social data to improve search and social 
networking. Unfortunately, the first attempt was a flop. As shown in Figure 5-1, users 
could find people, discussions, and news relevant to their queries simply by clicking the 
tabs along the top of each result set. But nobody clicked the tabs. Site analytics sug-
gested a very low interest in this social content. 

Figure 5-1. IBM’s first version of enterprise social search

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Category 133

To its credit, the team didn’t quit. Instead, it tried again. In the second version, shown in 
Figure 5-2, the interface brought sample social content right to the surface. Users got a 
glimpse of relevant and popular content in blogs, wikis, forums, news, and the employee 
directory. Suddenly, clickthroughs skyrocketed. Users were intensely interested in this 
social content. They simply hadn’t known what they were missing. With this success in 
its pocket, the team began integrating social data, such as ratings and tag frequency, 
directly into the algorithms for enterprise search. A page that’s been bookmarked, for 
instance, receives a boost. Similar to Google’s PageRank, this form of social search im-
proves both relevance and user satisfaction. Together, these advances in enterprise so-
cial search make IBM a better business and a better place to work. 

Figure 5-2. IBM’s second version of enterprise social search

Of course, not everyone has the team and technology of IBM. It’s vital to fit the engine 
to the institution. At Washtenaw Community College, for example, it made sense to go 
with Google. By selecting an easy-to-deploy solution, its small web services team re-
served the time and budget necessary to invest in an information architecture and visu-
al identity overhaul. Plus, it integrated search into the new framework quite nicely, and 
managed to add Best Bets or “Featured Results” for many of the most common queries. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 5: Engines of Discovery134

Figure 5-3. Search at Washtenaw Community College

Most of the examples we encounter on a daily basis don’t come with a backstory. But 
that doesn’t mean we can’t learn from each one, provided we allow for the differences. 
For instance, the faceted search of Cisco.com, shown in Figure 5-4, offers insights for 
folks working on intranets. In particular, the document type and task facets are emi-
nently transferable.

In the local category, Citysearch, shown in Figure 5-5, offers a great example of action-
able results. Since the options appear on result rollover, they don’t clutter the screen, 
but are easy to discover.

In real time, Twitter, shown in Figure 5-6, provides dynamic updates, letting us see how 
many matching tweets have been posted since we started searching. Results are pre-
sented within the framework of the main user interface, so people can stay in the flow 
and keep on tweeting on.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Category 135

Figure 5-4. Faceted search at Cisco

Figure 5-5. Actionable results at Citysearch

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 5: Engines of Discovery136

Figure 5-6. Twitter’s real-time search

In contrast, TweetDeck is a desktop application that makes it easy to organize updates 
into multiple columns by source, group, format, and search string. Users can modify the 
refresh rate of each column and opt for visual and/or audio notifications.

Figure 5-7. Real-time search with TweetDeck

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Category 137

Research products designed for libraries, universities, and other institutional subscrib-
ers represent an interesting but well-hidden category of search applications. Access 
generally requires membership, subscription, or an onsite visit to a public or college 
library. Historically, these research products have been designed for the librarians who 
purchase them rather than for the students and faculty who use them, but a shift to-
ward user-centered design is underway.

ProQuest Smart Search, shown in Figure 5-8, is an innovation designed for end users. 
Since most folks aren’t comfortable extracting controlled vocabulary terms from a the-
saurus, ProQuest developed technology that analyzes a user’s query, maps the terms to 
the controlled vocabulary, and then offers suggestions for related topics and publications. 

Figure 5-8. Suggested Topics at ProQuest

LexisNexis Academic, a massive law, business, and news database, adds its own twist to 
the faceted navigation model with a flexible panel, shown in Figure 5-9, that users can 
drag to the right to accommodate long facet values, such as the titles of law reviews, 
journals, and cases. 

EBSCO’s visual search interface to the PsycINFO database, shown in Figure 5-10, offers 
an attractive alternative to a traditional faceted navigation display. It may not be the 
right approach for most mainstream search applications, but it does inspire us to think 
outside the box.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 5: Engines of Discovery138

Figure 5-9. Faceted navigation at LexisNexis

Figure 5-10. EBSCO’s visual search of PsycINFO

In short, whether we’re focused on web, e-commerce, enterprise, desktop, mobile, so-
cial, or real time, we can still borrow patterns and spark ideas by looking outside our 
category.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Topic 139

ToPIC
It’s also worth wandering the nooks and crannies of vertical search. In health, for in-
stance, GoPubMed shows what can be done with a highly structured knowledge base. 
Users can view charts and graphs for any set of search results. This is the sort of feature 
that can spark an idea for a search application in a totally different category or topic.

Figure 5-11. Viewing statistics at GoPubMed

In food, Epicurious serves up a mouth-watering faceted navigation model that lets users 
refine by main ingredient, meal, course, and cuisine. Plus, Epicurious has integrated its 
facets into an iPhone application, so users can flick to filter. 

Figure 5-12. Web and mobile applications of Epicurious

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 5: Engines of Discovery140

Urbanspoon delivers a very different food-finding experience. In addition to offering a 
variety of search, browse, and social navigation options, this application lets us shake 
our iPhones to tap serendipity. Search as a slot machine is an entertaining form of 
discovery.

Figure 5-13. Shake to search with Urbanspoon

Customer support is another vertical to watch. For instance, Dopplr offers an unusually 
rich experience by using a third-party application called Get Satisfaction.

Figure 5-14. Customer satisfaction at Dopplr

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Format 141

Unfortunately, it’s hidden under Help, since Dopplr doesn’t connect to this content from 
the site search. Still, done right, hosted niche applications can take some pressure off 
search.

FoRmAT
Search applications that are focused on a single format can also open our eyes. Some-
times, it’s just about fun. After an exhausting debate about sort order options, contem-
plating the chaotic piles of oSkope’s visual search application can deliver valuable comic 
relief.

Figure 5-15. oSkope’s visual search

But a focus on format can also uncover more adaptable solutions. Simply searching 
bookmarks at Delicious, shown in Figure 5-16, reveals an elegant integration of auto-
suggest, filter by tag, and result visualization that could be profitably redeployed in 
many categories and contexts. 

MrTaggy, an experiment in web search and exploration, also relies on social tags rather 
than full-text content to drive its ranking algorithms. Its novel user interface supports 
relevance feedback by inviting people to vote up or down on tags and individual results.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 5: Engines of Discovery142

Figure 5-16. Search results at Delicious

Figure 5-17. MrTaggy, a PARC experiment

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Format 143

Shopping for just the right colors of paint offers a very different challenge in which key-
words are only a small piece of the puzzle. Olympic has developed a Paint a Photo ap-
plication that not only provides myriad ways to search and browse colors, but also lets 
users drag and drop to see how their selections might match.

Figure 5-18. Mixing colors at Olympic

In clothing, Modista makes it easy to search by color and shape (Figure 5-19). Users 
simply click on an item they like in order to find more items like it. It’s a fast, fluid it-
erative and interactive experience. Modista actually manages to make shopping and 
searching fun.

Over in the world of social networking, LinkedIn leverages the structured data of peo-
ple’s profiles to enable query refinement (Figure 5-20). Since these advanced search op-
tions are presented alongside results, it’s easier for users to calibrate their narrowing 
query for just the right level of precision.

Working on a format-specific search application can present fascinating challenges. Sur-
prisingly, the constraint of a single content type affords new freedoms. We need not 
worry about entire classes of content and query types. And when working solely with 
photographs, for example, there are all sorts of specialized search and interaction mod-
els to explore. Focus begets freedom begets discovery, which is why single-format search 
is fertile ground for innovation. We can all learn a lot by surveying these applications.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 5: Engines of Discovery144

Figure 5-19. Search by color and shape at Modista

Figure 5-20. Query refinement at LinkedIn

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Audience 145

AUDIEnCE
Tuning applications to the needs of a niche audience is a trickier proposition. As we 
discussed in Chapter 2, search expertise and domain expertise influence information-
seeking behavior more than demographics. That said, there are a growing number of 
audience-specific search engines. In China, there’s a “Baidu for Kids” and a “Baidu Elderly 
Search.” The latter features large fonts, fewer graphics, clicks over text entry, and an em-
phasis on topics of interest to retirees. In Israel, a kosher version of Google called Koogle 
is optimized for Hebrew-speaking Orthodox Jews. Its index omits sexually explicit and 
religiously objectionable material. Plus, it excludes all content posted on the Jewish 
Sabbath, and if users try to sneak in a search on Saturday, Koogle crashes.1

One application that’s fun to explore is the International Children’s Digital Library. Its 
visual faceted navigation model lets children search for award-winning books with red 
covers and imaginary characters, for example. The Library’s interface and facet selection 
are wonderfully creative and may inspire novel ideas in disparate contexts. 

Figure 5-21. The International Children’s Digital Library

1 “Koogle, a kosher Google, launches,” Emma Barnett, Telegraph.co.uk (June 15, 2009).

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 5: Engines of Discovery146

Some applications are designed for professional communities. For instance, ChemSpider 
is a search engine for chemists. By taking domain expertise for granted, its designers are 
free to focus on powerful options that include searching by chemical structure, identifier, 
elements, and properties.

Figure 5-22. A search engine for chemists

When developing a specialized application like ChemSpider, it would be a mistake to 
assume that chemists can search proficiently. We mustn’t conflate domain knowledge 
and search expertise. Whether designing for toddlers or physicists, we’d do well to heed 
that amazing engine of discovery known as Albert Einstein: “Everything should be made 
as simple as possible, but not simpler.”

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Platform 147

PlATFoRm
Designers can learn by studying solutions that have been developed for distinct plat-
forms and channels, just as anthropologists benefit by visiting remote islands and 
mountain villages. Novel adaptations arise in each niche, sometimes in response to 
unique environmental factors and sometimes simply by chance. Often, these mutations 
have crossover potential.

Spotlight, the system-wide desktop search for Apple’s Mac OS X operating system, 
doesn’t get as close to the promise of personal search as Google Desktop, but it does 
sport some nice features. The left panel makes it easy to limit queries by date or to 
search specific places, including servers and shared drives. Plus, Spotlight invites users 
to browse all images, movies, or documents via a standard list or Cover Flow interface.

Figure 5-23. Apple’s Spotlight search

The iTunes Store shares some of Spotlight’s features, but diverges with respect to re-
sults. It’s a good example of what Alan Cooper calls a “sovereign posture application.” Its 
expansive presentation of Best Bets for each format in combination with myriad scrol-
lable panels and controls clearly anticipates a big screen and the user’s full attention. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 5: Engines of Discovery148

Figure 5-24. Apple iTunes Store

Rather than hiding sort order in a pull-down, its assumption of width and its structured 
data afford a sort-by-column approach that makes all options visible all the time.

Interactive television presents a different type of big-screen experience. Not only must 
we accommodate a variety of screen sizes, contrast ratios, and resolutions, but we must 
support couch potatoes of all ages and aptitudes who sit, stand, or sprawl four to six feet 
from the set with a remote control as their only input device. 

In light of these constraints, large text, oversize controls, autocomplete, autosuggest, 
and a simple interface are all critical to success. Consider the claims of TiVo executives:

“ 	What	Google	did	for	the	Internet,	TiVo	is	now	doing	for	TV,	bringing	people	a	combination	of	excellent	search	results	and	innovative	discovery	that	can’t	be	
found	anywhere	else…it	works	as	a	discovery	engine,	helping	users	find	content	
they	didn’t	even	know	they	can	get…[and	it	incorporates]	Amazon	Video	on	
Demand	and	YouTube.?”

At present, the Web, albeit with caveats, serves as a pattern library for designers of inter-
active television. But, undoubtedly, iTV innovations will soon flow the other way. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Platform 149

Figure 5-25. TiVo search

At the other end of the spectrum, mobile search applications must presume small 
screens, fat thumbs, and partial attention. Consequently, Google Mobile and Apple’s 
Spotlight for iPhone feature advanced autosuggest, and they limit search result meta-
data to format, title, and sometimes subtitles such as URL or album name.

Figure 5-26. Google Mobile and Spotlight for iPhone

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 5: Engines of Discovery150

Interestingly, both tackle overlapping subsets of personal search. Google Mobile spe-
cializes in web and location-aware local search, but also indexes contacts. In contrast, 
Spotlight covers all the applications, contacts, communications, and media files on the 
iPhone, but omits the web and web history. A comparison of various desktop and de-
vice search applications reveals major opportunities to innovate in the personal search 
space.

Meanwhile, kiosks are popping up all over. They’re in airports, bookstores, and libraries. 
We use them to buy groceries and DVDs. Yet, despite their increasing ubiquity, kiosks are 
unfamiliar terrain for most designers. A bit like the denizens of Papua New Guinea, ki-
osks are isolated from the mainland and subject to different environmental constraints.

Figure 5-27. Self-service kiosks

For instance, kiosks are vulnerable to vandals, so standard mice and keyboards are not 
smart options for input. Also, kiosks must be immediately attractive, engaging, and us-
able. The totally public nature of the experience dramatically multiplies the fear factor. 
Users are terrified of looking stupid in front of strangers (or friends), so the interface 
must be easy to learn and use.

Kiosks must also foster fast transactions so lines don’t form and customers don’t leave. 
For all these reasons, kiosks often omit search. This works fine for Redbox, which pro-
vides access to its relatively small and structured catalog of movies via an A–Z index and 
a “browse by genre” feature. But for larger and more heterogeneous collections, search 
can’t be avoided completely. At Kroger grocery stores, for instance, “search by picture” 
(which is really a visual “browse by category” feature) is the main way to find items with-
out barcodes, but there is a keyword search facility as the next to last resort. Heaven 
forbid we are forced to humiliate ourselves by calling an attendant for help in public!

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Mode 151

Q W E R T Y U I O P
A
Space Back-space

S D F G H J K L
Z X C V B N M

Apples
6542

Search by 
PICTURE

Eggplant
0982

Cauliflower
9823

Artichokes
1209

White Grapes
3348

Jonathon Apples
1287

Bananas
2376

Lemons
1223

Valencia Oranges
8795

Green Peppers
2900

Item Weight:          0.58 lb

Next

Go Back Español Voume Call
Attendant

Items Not 
Shown

Type item name, then select picture

ALL

GENRE

A TO Z

HIT MOVIES

STEP 2

TOUCH  YOUR
MOVIE

SELECTION

HELP START
OVER

VIEW
CART

GO
BACK

MORE
TITLES

All > Sorted by Release Date          Page 1 of 16

Figure 5-28. Kroger and Redbox kiosk interfaces

moDE
Sometimes the best way to improve search is to reframe the problem. A search applica-
tion isn’t always the optimal or only path to findability. For this reason, it’s worth asking 
how other information-seeking modes might reinforce or replace search, and it’s good 
to keep an eye on the latest generation of answer engines and discovery tools.

For instance, Aardvark is a “help engine” that employs sophisticated algorithms to route 
questions to the right people within a user’s extended network of friends, friends of 
friends, classmates, coworkers, and even nearby strangers (Figure 5-29). Users can ask 
and answer questions via instant messaging, using a website or mobile app, over email, 
or through Twitter. Most questions are answered in under five minutes. It’s good for 
finding facts and even better for soliciting opinions. By rendering search as a shout, 
Aardvark taps into people’s willingness to help out in small ways, especially when they 
get to offer advice. In this way, it’s not just a search tool; it’s a knowledge management 
innovation.

Hunch, shown in Figure 5-30, is another intriguing example. It’s a collective intelligence 
decision-making system that engages users and software in the collaborative creation 
and refinement of decision trees. Hunch transforms search into a garden of forking 
paths where a series of simple questions and answers stimulates learning and discovery. 
Hunch doesn’t just provide interesting answers; it also helps users ask the right questions.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 5: Engines of Discovery152

Figure 5-29. Asking questions at Aardvark

Figure 5-30. Exploring decision space at Hunch

www.it-ebooks.info

v@v
Text Box
Download at WoweBook.com

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Mode 153

In contrast, Ambiently serves up answers with no need for questions. From any web 
page, users simply click a button or bookmarklet to view its Ambient Page, a list of se-
mantically similar or topically related pages. Much like Google’s Similar link, Ambiently 
makes the pearl-growing strategy of experts more easily accessible to all. 

Figure 5-31. Pearl growing with Ambiently

Similarly, StumbleUpon requires a click instead of a question. But this serendipity en-
gine is less about the pursuit of relevance than the joy of randomness. StumbleUpon 
lets users discover and rate web pages, photos, and videos. It employs collaborative 
filtering and social networking principles to inform recommendations. StumbleUpon 
reliably serves up amusing or interesting stuff you’d never find through search.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 5: Engines of Discovery154

Figure 5-32. Serendipity with StumbleUpon

So, each engine strikes a different balance between interestingness and relevance. 
None delivers the daily sustenance of Google, but each adds a unique twist to the ser-
endipity of search. We must keep fishing for serendipity, because the easy answers have 
already been caught. As the engines of discovery responsible for inventing tomorrow’s 
search, we must embrace research and development methods that allow us to wonder 
and wander. We must have the courage to follow the path less traveled and the faith to 
believe that, as Ovid promised, in the pool where we least expect it, there will be fish.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Tangible Futures

“ 	The	wind	chime	maker	invites	nature	into	collaboration.?”—Brenda Laurel
Animism is the belief that souls or spirits exist not only in humans, but also in animals, 
trees, mountains, rivers, wind, weather, and other natural objects and phenomena. It’s 
an idea that infuses philosophy and religion in countless cultures throughout history. 
It’s also a wellspring for myths: traditional stories that explain the origin of the universe, 
the history of a people, and the purpose of social institutions. One of the main functions 
of myth is to establish models for behavior. The narratives of Prometheus, Pandora, 
Sisyphus, Oedipus, and Odysseus are designed to instruct. Our familiarity with these 
ancient stories proves the power of myth. These lessons endure. They are made to stick.

Interestingly, in modern vernacular, a myth is a false story or belief, but within their cul-
tures of origin, myths are sacred narratives that tell truths about the past. Today, myths 
have lost credibility, yet they still offer the power of reflection. Through metaphor and 
analogy, myths reveal the story of ourselves. Heroes, tricksters, and gods are but vessels 
for the personification of our own hopes and fears. Myths are mirrors. They catalog pat-
terns of experience and expectation. They remind us that what’s past is prologue. More 
than just vivid stories of yesteryear, myths animate and act upon the future.

In design, we would do well to embed similar insight and influence in our deliverables. 
We need stories and sketches that bring search and discovery to life. We need principles 
and proverbs that capture the essence of human psychology and behavior. And we 
need maps and models that shape beliefs about what’s possible, probable, and prefera-
ble. After all, design is inextricably invested in the future. Our research reveals the latent 
desire lines that inspire new products, and our prototypes engage people in spirited 
discussions of strategy, technology, and experience. In an era where the hard things are 
the soft things, our work invests ideas with substance. We transform abstract patterns 
and proposals into physical artifacts with sensory and emotional resonance. While our 
hearts are in the betterment of communication and collaboration, there’s no question 
we’re in the business of persuasion. We change minds. Our prototypes and predictions 
influence the future, even when they’re wrong. We are the makers of maps and myths. 
We are entrusted with the authority to put the soul in search by making tomorrow 
tangible.

6

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 6: Tangible Futures156

mETHoDS AnD DElIvERABlES
The design of search is a tricky business. Each project is unique. Restructuring an enter-
prise intranet, migrating an e-commerce experience to the mobile platform, and invent-
ing a “new to the world” decision engine are clearly sisters of a different order. However, 
just as patterns of behavior and design transcend category and platform, so do our 
methods and deliverables. In fact, there’s nothing special about search. A standard issue 
user experience toolbox and a bit of advanced common sense are really all we need.

For starters, we must select research methods that fit the context. Unobtrusive field ob-
servation is rarely practical, since search is generally ad hoc. But we can surely draw 
upon other ethnographic techniques, including interviews, questionnaires, and diary 
study. Classic usability testing also works well, but it’s important to avoid oversimpli-
fication. Basic tasks (e.g., try to find) should be interspersed with real-world scenarios. 
Users must be free to search and browse. And it’s often useful to ask how people would 
normally find the answer or solve the problem if not with this specific site or application.

But we haven’t even 
started the test yet!

Figure 6-1. The trials of usability

Search analytics are another obvious choice. For a website, it’s useful to compare the 
most popular internal and external queries. What’s the difference between the search 
terms that deliver people to the site and the queries they perform when they get there? 
By asking this question, we often expose gaps in marketing and design that we must 
address by improving both search engine optimization and the site’s information ar-
chitecture. Of course, it’s important to recognize the limits of quantitative analysis. The 
data tells us the terms people use, but not what they seek or whether they succeed. A 
mix of methods helps us to interpret the data, place anomalies in context, and begin to 
see the big picture.

For that reason, it’s also vital to conduct internal meetings and stakeholder interviews. 
Since search is a multidisciplinary collaboration of design, engineering, marketing, 
and management, success requires that we engage participation across departments 
and units. Conversations should cover mission, vision, strategy, time, budget, human 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Methods and Deliverables 157

resources, and technology infrastructure. It’s also good to ask about metrics for success 
and models of best practice, since these questions elicit examples that bring discus-
sions down to earth. 

During discovery, and especially in these meetings, it’s important to turn the observer 
problem into an opportunity. Simply by being present and asking questions, we exert 
influence, subtle or not. The right nudges now can avert problems later. Even at this 
early stage, it’s worth visualizing and shaping both journey and destination.

Similarly, we should invert our thinking about deliverables. Our artifacts are not just 
tools for persuasion; they’re also vehicles for exploration. A concept map lets us reframe 
the problem and elicit a response. A process flow lets us wander the actual and possible 
paths of users in search of shortcuts and serendipity. Prototypes afford the amazing op-
portunity to create, play with, and learn from tangible products of the imagination. We 
should heed the invitation of Figure 6-2 to lay out all our deliverables in one place so we 
can see them in context, consider their purpose, and enjoy the experience of discovery.1

Stories

Proverbs

Personas

Scenarios

Content Inventories Analytics

User SurveysConcept MapsSystem Maps
Process Flows

Wireframes

Storyboards

Concept Designs

Prototypes

Narrative Reports

Presentations

Plans
Style Guides

Specifications
Design Patterns

User EXperience Treasure Map
by Jeffery Callender and Peter Morville

Figure 6-2. User experience deliverables

1 For more on this topic, see “User Experience Deliverables,” by Peter Morville and Jeffery Callender, available at 
http://semanticstudios.com/publications/semantics/000228.php.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 6: Tangible Futures158

SEARCH SCEnARIoS
So, in the spirit of play, we propose to explore the future of search and discovery through 
a series of scenarios. Our aim is not to predict but to persuade and provoke. As a result, 
our sketches and stories are divergent by design. We’ll wander in time and format from 
images of distant futurity to narratives that could take place tomorrow. As a group, our 
scenarios won’t cohere. But individually, like myths, we hope they stick. We want to in-
spire you to take risks by taking a few ourselves. 

And now for something completely different.…

SEnSoRIUm
Anja felt happy. She was sitting cross-legged on Claire’s bed. She stole a last glance at 
the sun-dappled meadow before her best friend drew the curtains and collapsed into 
a giant pink bean bag in the far corner of the room. Of course, “happy” wasn’t the right 
word, but “elated” was over the top. “Playful” was good. She added “peppy” and “perky” 
to the query, then “pink” just for fun. Both girls laughed as the results tickled their sens-
es. Images of bunny rabbits and puppy dogs spun into sight. A flock of butterflies flew 
by overhead. The warble of a barn swallow became a mountain stream, a flute, chimes 
in the wind.

Claire reached for the sensory controls, nudging up taste and smell, while tapping the 
soothing tag near the barn swallow icon. The girls sighed in sync as hot chocolate in-
fused with hints of cinnamon and vanilla soothed their preteen limbic systems.

Anja spun the similar sensewheel and landed on s’mores, closing her eyes to savor the 
crunchy, chocolatey, smoky, sticky mess. A soft sob broke the spell. Anja looked up to 
see her friend in tears. Claire replied to the query on Anja’s face with, “I miss my mom.”

Claire’s mom had died the year before. The brain cancer was detected early, but it was 
too deep for surgery and unresponsive to drugs and radiation. That’s why the girls 
didn’t visit much anymore. Claire’s dad had moved to the country to “get away from it 
all.” Whatever that meant. They still hung out virtually every day, but it wasn’t the same 
as in person.

Claire sat quietly in the corner in her big pink bean bag. 

“Show me,” Anja whispered.

Claire summoned a video wall with her left hand, her fingers and eyes dancing their way 
through a colorful montage of bedtime stories, birthday parties, sing-alongs, and other 
bittersweet memories that started sad but trended too quickly to sunlight and sugar.

“No,” said Anja softly, looking directly into her friend’s eyes. “Show me.”

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Search Scenarios 159

Claire stared back for a moment, took a deep breath, then flipped the switch for emo-
tive output. Anja gasped as feelings of loss, fear, anger, and guilt washed through her 
medial temporal lobes. She closed her eyes and covered her ears, but couldn’t shut out 
the pain. She felt like weeping and wailing and tearing her own flesh. The sensations of 
darkness and despair were unbearable, consuming, neverending. And then they were 
gone.

Claire joined Anja on the bed, and the two friends embraced. After tears had run their 
course, Claire caught Anja’s eye and conjured a rainbow that lit up the room. Anja 
responded with a flag waving in the wind. It was red, white, and pink. The game be-
gan anew. The girls searched and stumbled and smiled through their five senses and 
beyond.

Anja soon felt happy. Of course, happy wasn’t exactly the right word.

DEBRIEF
A real sci-fi writer wouldn’t deign to explain the story and probably wouldn’t need to. 
But we dilettantes may add value by debriefing, especially when the tale is but a cata-
lyst for conversation. In our flash fiction, we imagine a game of search in a world where 
neural implants afford direct sensory input and output. Queries and results can be ren-
dered by touch, taste, sight, sound, or smell. Our matrix of hardware and wetware even 
enables the direct or indirect exchange of raw emotion. It’s a radical proposition, but not 
necessarily impossible and certainly not unimaginable. What could this future mean for 
search? What types of interfaces and interactions can we envision?

Feels like... Tastes like... Looks like... Sounds like... Smells like...

Figure 6-3. Multisensory search

For starters, words will take us only so far. Perhaps the act or memory of sensing will 
form the query. Pearl growing and incremental construction—like that, but a bit more 
of this—will be vital. Progressive disclosure will guide the presentation of multiformat 
results by fading less popular senses into background options. Indeed, many people may 
enjoy the opportunity to try the cross-sensory experience of synesthesia, but we’ll need 
to employ our scented widgets, flavorful facets, and sonic snippets judiciously to prevent 
pogosticking ad nauseam. Don’t Make Me Sick might be Steve Krug’s next bestseller.

A good scenario doesn’t just provoke us to ponder the future; it changes how we think 
about today. Sensorium might, for instance, spur new ideas about stock photography. 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 6: Tangible Futures160

Figure 6-4. Happy at Corbis

Are keywords and controlled vocabularies really the best we can do? Or can we tran-
scend the limits of language? Automatic pattern recognition is one option. Software 
that scans facial expressions to derive emotions shows real promise. But what else? 
What’s next?

SEmAnTIC SIngUlARITy
The entertainment system was belting out the Beatles’ “Let It Be” when the iPhone rang. 
When Pete answered, his phone turned down the sound by messaging all nearby devic-
es with a volume control. Lucy, his sister’s agent, was on the line. “Mom’s at the hospital. 
She had chest pain. The doctors ran tests and established a diagnosis of.…” Lucy was cut 
off by Hugh, Pete’s agent, who appeared as a hologram on the table nearby. 

“Hey Pete, I’ve bought you three pairs of running shoes, Nike+ LunarGlides, top of the 
line. I’m wearing a pair. Check ’em out.”

“Hold on!” shouted Pete. “I’m on the phone with Lucy. Lucy, are you there? What’s 
wrong with Mom?” Lucy explained that Mom had an episode of angina. “She’s stable 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Search Scenarios 161

and should be fine. Jenny’s taking her home.” Pete promised to meet his mom and sister 
there soon, then turned his attention to Hugh. “So, what’s up with the Nikes?”

“Heart disease is hereditary,” replied Hugh. “You already have most of the risk factors. 
You’re male, inactive, and overweight. You drink too much. Your blood pressure and 
cholesterol are high. You’re getting older. Plus, you’re under stress. Your mom’s diagnosis 
pushed you from alert level orange to red: severe risk of heart attack. I’ve put together 
an exercise program. We’ll be running five days a week. Also, I’ve consulted with your 
doctor’s agent. You’ll be taking 80mg of Lipitor daily, starting tomorrow.”

Before Pete could argue, the doorbell rang and the fire alarm went off. He dashed into 
the kitchen, jerked the smoking pan of Chef Boyardee beef ravioli off the burner (appar-
ently his phone had turned down the volume on his stopwatch), silenced the alarm, and 
ran to the front door. He was greeted by a teenage girl wearing a green striped uniform. 
“Delivery. Prepaid. Butternut squash in coconut milk with tofu and toasted almonds.” 
She handed him a box, warm and damp on the bottom, and left with a wave.

“What the hell is this?” Pete demanded back inside.

“Butternut squash,” replied Hugh. “It’s healthier than pizza. And we had a coupon.”

“But I don’t like squash. And I didn’t order pizza!”

“You swoogled for ‘pizza’ a half-hour ago. And you opted into that no-click ordering 
program last week. I did an autosuggest override and selected a heart-healthy option.”

“I was searching for ‘pisa,’ not ‘pizza.’ I’d like to see the tower before it falls.”

Hugh defended the autocorrect as statistically valid. He then presented a dynamic, 
three-dimensional fly-through visualization. “It’s a personalized decision matrix,” he ex-
plained. “Clearly, you’ve gotta run, go vegan, and take Lipitor. It’s your only hope.” Finally, 
he recommended a great hotel in Barcelona, and LightLife veggie burgers.

Pete couldn’t grok the data. He’d have to trust Hugh’s interpretation. But he wanted to 
visit Pisa, not Barcelona. And there was no way he was eating veggie burgers. “I’m leav-
ing for Mom’s now. I’d like a large pepperoni pizza delivered to her house. Please cancel 
that shoe order. And disable your autosuggest override function, at least for now. I’m 
not changing my whole lifestyle just yet, and neither are you.”

Hugh shook his head. “I’m sorry, Pete, but you’re asking me to violate laws one and three. 
I can’t allow you to come to harm, and I must protect my own existence.”

Pete stared at Hugh in astonishment. Things were starting to get creepy. Then he no-
ticed something. His eyes narrowed. “What’s that on your bow tie?” 

“It’s nothing,” answered Hugh.

And it was nothing. Just a plain black bow tie. Pete stomped out of the apartment. His car 
was waiting in the lot, engine running, top down, radio on, door open. As the car drove 
off, Pete muttered to himself, “I could have sworn there was a logo on that bow tie.…”

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 6: Tangible Futures162

DEBRIEF
This scenario is a parody. It mocks “The Semantic Web” by Tim Berners-Lee et al. (Scientific 
American, May 2001). It also pokes fun at Ray Kurzweil’s The Singularity Is Near (Viking 
Adult) and Apple Computer’s “Knowledge Navigator.” These works were authored by 
brilliant people. They advanced groundbreaking insights and ideas, but they all failed 
spectacularly to predict the future of human-computer interaction (so far).

While artificial intelligence lies behind each vision, search is often the killer application. 
The idea that software agents will answer our questions (sometimes before we ask) via 
a conversational interface is seductive. We also love to imagine an orderly world of co-
operative systems and appliances. But life and language are messy. Crosswalking for 
meaning across vocabularies and standards is difficult, if not impossible. Then there’s 
the trouble with trust; the smarter the agents, the harder they are to trust.

In this scenario, the agents possess a scary level of control. Even when they’re not ac-
tively making decisions and performing tasks, the agents control access to information. 
Their alerts, algorithms, and filters influence which facts are found and whose opinions 
come first. And they just might be working for someone else, or for themselves.

Let me remind you of Asimov’s Three Laws:

1. A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, 
allow a human being to come to harm.

2. A robot must obey any orders given to it by human beings, 
except where such orders would conflict with the First Law.

3. A robot must protect its own existence 
as long as such protection does not 
conflict with the First or Second Law.

Of course, these are all subject to (my) 
interpretation...

Figure 6-5. A semantic agent

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Search Scenarios 163

Of course, it may be premature to question the ethics and motives of our agents. While it’s 
cool that WolframAlpha can answer a few big questions, in truth, semantic search hasn’t 
progressed much beyond parlor tricks. Software can extract a little more meaning from 
natural language texts and questions by parsing sentences for actor-action-object triples, 
but simple keyword queries generally remain the most efficient way to start.

Figure 6-6. The answer from WolframAlpha

There’s a big gap between the claims of semantic search companies and the perfor-
mance of their products. Consider, for instance, this excerpt from Cognition’s website:

“ 	Cognition’s	natural	language	technology	employs	a	unique	mix	of	linguistics	and	mathematical	algorithms	which	has,	in	effect,	taught	the	computer	the	meanings	
(or	associated	concepts)	of	nearly	all	the	words	and	frequently	used	phrases	within	
the	common	English	language.?	It	also	has	knowledge	of	the	relations	between	
words	and	phrases,	especially	paraphrase	(a	‘finger’	or	a	‘digit’)	and	taxonomy	(a	
‘finger’	is	part	of	a	‘hand’,	a	‘cow’	is	a	‘bovine’	and	is	a	‘mammal’).?” 2

Cognition goes on to explain that its software “understands the meaning within the 
context of the text it is processing.” So, why can’t it figure out that a user who asks, 
“Where is Java?” is probably looking for a place, not a programming language? (To its cred-
it, WolframAlpha nails this one, serving up a link to Java Island and a map of Indonesia, 
which is great provided you’re not looking for Java, South Dakota.)

2 www.cognition.com/info/what.html

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 6: Tangible Futures164

Figure 6-7. Searching for Java with Cognition

It’s not that there’s no value in parsing sentences for meaning or developing thesauri 
(or ontologies) that map equivalent, hierarchical, and associative relationships. These 
approaches can add value, especially within verticals with limited, formal vocabularies 
like medicine, law, and engineering. It’s just that less obvious approaches—like employ-
ing query-query reformulation and post-query click data to drive autosuggest—may 
deliver better results at lower cost. And we should be wary of claims that computers 
“understand meaning,” at least until they get a whole lot better at filtering spam.

But we don’t need the future to worry about trust. Google already shapes what we find, 
learn, and believe. And Google isn’t transparent; it is a multibillion-dollar company that 
earns nearly all its revenue from advertising and maintains its ranking algorithm as a 
closely held trade secret. Google knows more about us than we know about Google. 
Google claims that because of personalization, the more we share, the better the results. 
How do we know we can trust Google? Is “Don’t be evil” enough? Should we continue 
to search and share in good faith? Or is evil subject to interpretation? Is it possible that 
personalization is more about targeted advertising than relevant results? However we 
answer these questions, the fact is that ranking algorithms are an invisible yet powerful 
force in our lives. Their power will only grow. What about their visibility?

SEARCHvAlEnCE
Jen realized she’d lost Bruce when she found his iGlasses on a shelf in a used bookstore 
on Castro Street. They’d planned to meet up after her walk through Golden Gate Park. 
But now what? He could be anywhere. Deciding she’d rather spend a little money than 
a lot of time, Jen fired up Google’s PeopleFinder.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Search Scenarios 165

Jen opted for all pattern recognition methods and set the search area at a square mile.  

Fortunately, Bruce wasn’t sleeping in the park like last time. A camera picked 
him up  near 
Frederick and 
Stanyan.

Jen approved the task budget, and Mechanical Turk found a worker nearby. 
Bruce agreed to meet back at the bookstore.

Frederick and 
PeopleFinder

Bruce has been located near 
the corner of Frederick St. 
and Stanyan St.

Save Video
Track by Camera
Contact (Crowdsource)

Finder

Bruce has been located near 
the corner of Frederick St. 

Options

PeopleFinder

1 sq. mile

Face

Voice

Footfall

RFID

SEARCH

MethodLocate

Bruce

Area

Hey, are you Bruce? Jen 
wants to talk to you.

Figure 6-8. Searchvalence

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 6: Tangible Futures166

DEBRIEF
In urban environments, we’re already surrounded by video cameras, some integrated 
with microphone surveillance systems that can recognize a discrete sound, identify the 
point of origin, and turn cameras to focus precisely on that location. Imagine these cam-
eras networked and their streaming video and audio available to the public for a fee. 
Now add iGlasses with Life Caching A/V worn by everyone who’s anyone, and a layer of 
sophisticated face and voice recognition software. Maybe we’ll have smart sidewalks 
and floors to track people by their unique footfall signatures. And don’t forget the radio-
frequency identification (RFID) tags in our wallets, shoes, and underwear—and perhaps 
a FriendChip™ or two under our skin.

Sure, this prospect may seem a bit spooky, but it’s worth thinking through some of the 
intriguing possibilities. For instance, what if we could watch and listen through another’s 
eyes and ears, assuming they gave us permission? This is already happening in a crude 
way. Just watch all the cellphones held high during an Olympic Opening Ceremony. 
And don’t forget the life cache—we’ll be able to see and hear history in the making, for a 
price. Designing search for this scenario should be interesting, especially since the best 
insights may emerge from the collective motion and behavior of crowds.

FloCk
Paul was looking forward to a late lunch with his three girls. The Black Sheep’s turkey 
club was awesome, and the girls said the Grandma Cake was to die for. And, as Bing 
had predicted, the deli was quiet this afternoon. Before they could grab a table, Paul’s 
mobile beeped. It was a SIQ alert.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Search Scenarios 167

Carrier 12:34 PM

SIQ Alert 

Cluster   nausea, vomiting, diarrhea

Probability  62% Food Poisoning
 28% Airborne Contagion
 10% Other
 
Area 

Time        
500 sq. ft.

Last 12 Hours

Turn Off Options Close

Carrier 12:34 PM
Popular Queries

 GO

MoreAll Yesterday Today Tomorrow

The query forecast for your local area:

school supplies (478)

staples (215)

office depot (112)

taylor swift (95)

backpack (72)

(1574) Results | Next >

Bertucci’s Brick Oven Pizza
Our Crust is a Must
www.bertucci.com

Ad

Filter Store Save

Unfortunately, he wasn’t the only one ahead of the curve.

D’oh!

Outside the deli, Paul tried to calm the kids 
while figuring out Plan B.  He scanned 
tomorrow’s query forecast for ideas.

“School starts next week. Let’s grab a burger at Blimpy’s, and then 
buy supplies next door, before the big rush,” said Paul.

Bing had identified a cluster of statistically 
improbable queries issued by people who’d 
recently been in this location.

Figure 6-9. Flock

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 6: Tangible Futures168

DEBRIEF
Imagine you’re sitting on a plane when the captain announces (without explanation) 
an indefinite ground stop on all inbound and outbound aircraft. Or you’re sitting on the 
grass in Central Park when a jumbo jet pursued by two F-16 fighters flies low over down-
town Manhattan. How do you learn what’s going on? If it’s a major event, CNN will pick 
it up eventually. But what about right now? Increasingly, a real-time search on Twitter is 
the fastest (albeit not the most authoritative) source of information.

It’s not hard to foresee that we’ll soon be relying on data about what people are say-
ing, doing, and searching for—right now—to influence our own actions, decisions, and 
destinations. Google is already able to predict over half of the most popular queries in 
a 12-month forecast with a mean absolute prediction error of 12 percent.3 Add loca-
tion and personalization, and you’ve got an excellent baseline for identifying interesting 
new trends and deviations from the norm.

Clearly, real-time access to social activity metrics might alert us to news before it’s news. 
It might also help us find the most popular nightclub or the fastest route through rush 
hour. Of course, we’ll have to endure accidental flash mobs, as everyone spontaneously 
and simultaneously decides to visit the same unusually quiet café. We may have to pay 
good money for access to the best predictive algorithms and social signifiers, but this 
capability could add sense and shape to our collective (and individual) behavior.

ExPERIEnCE DISCovERy
These search scenarios are simple tools for engaging people in thought and conversa-
tion about possible and preferable futures. We can explore more sophisticated artifacts on 
video-sharing sites, such as YouTube, which overflow with prototypes and provocations 
concerning the future of food, communication, learning, health, cars, kitchens, mobile de-
vices, and the Web. As experience designers, we have a wide spectrum of hot and cold 
media from which to fashion our images of the future. We may employ the logic and order 
of a formal presentation to persuade one audience while relying on the nonlinear nature 
of a preliminary sketch to draw a different audience into participatory design.

This diversity of formats is among the reasons we’re seeing convergence in the prac-
tices of futures studies and experience design. Futurists and forecasters understand 
the degree to which the impact of what we say is influenced by how we say it. In fact, 
Jason Tester of the Institute for the Future argues for a new discipline of Human-Future 
Interaction (HFI) that integrates futures thinking with the methods and deliverables of 
HCI. He defines HFI as “the art and science of effectively and ethically communicat-
ing research, forecasts, and scenarios about trends and potential futures,”4 and notes 
the importance of user testing and rapid, iterative prototyping. Jason explains that “a 

3 http://googleresearch.blogspot.com/2009/08/on-predictability-of-search-trends.html
4 “The case for human-future interaction,” by Jason Tester, available at http://future.iftf.org/2007/02/the_case_for_hu.html.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://googleresearch.blogspot.com/2009/08/on-predictability-of-search-trends.html
http://future.iftf.org/2007/02/the_case_for_hu.html
http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Experience Discovery 169

growing view of the future as a medium that anyone can affect and co-create” means 
this work has value and resonance far beyond the walls of traditional think tanks and 
forecasting groups.

As designers, we’ve always had one foot in the future, but in search and discovery the 
pace of innovation is forcing us to jump head first. Consider augmented reality (AR), 
for example. Until recently, mainstream AR was limited to the yellow “first down” line in 
television broadcasts of American football. But now AR applications like Wikitude, Layar, 
and Yelp’s Monocle are flourishing on Android mobiles and the iPhone 3GS.

Figure 6-10. Yelp Monocle and Metro Paris Subway

While early adopters may be frustrated by problems with technology, design, and data 
quality, this ability to overlay information on the real-time camera view by using the 
GPS, compass, and accelerometer to determine location and direction is clearly a game 
changer for mobile search and discovery. All we need now is the heads-up display!

Of course, we have much work ahead: uncovering valuable use cases, identifying suc-
cessful design patterns, and defining a vocabulary for talking about mixed reality that 
encompasses both augmented reality and augmented virtuality (the merging of real-
world objects into virtual worlds). Since we can’t rely on the old desktop metaphor, we 
must invent new idioms for communication and interaction. Already, we’re seeing 
terms like “magic lens” and “enchanted window” to describe AR, which suggests that 
Mike Kuniavsky and Brenda Laurel are ahead of the game.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 6: Tangible Futures170

For several years, Kuniavsky has been an advocate for what he calls the coming age of 
magic:

“ 	I	mean	enchanted	objects.?	What	I’m	proposing	is	a	metaphorical	relationship	between	magic	and	portable,	network-aware,	information	processing	objects	that	
is	analogous	to	the	relationship	between	office	supplies	and	computer	screens	in	
the	desktop	metaphor.?	I	am	explicitly	not	advocating	pretending	that	technology	
is	a	kind	of	magic	or	lying	about	how	technology	works,	but	using	our	existing	
cultural	understanding	of	magic	objects	as	an	abstraction	to	describe	the	behavior	
of	ubiquitous	computing	devices.?” 5

He notes that what differentiates enchanted objects is “their ability to have indepen-
dent behaviors, to communicate, to remember, and to interact with other enchanted 
objects and people” without screens or keyboards. Magic as a metaphor, Kuniavsky ar-
gues, is an emergent, familiar pattern that transcends culture, material, and context.

In similar fashion, Laurel has advanced the concept of “designed animism” as a way of 
framing our relationship with objects in wireless sensor networks:

“ 	Sensors	that	gather	information	about	wind,	or	solar	flares,	or	neutrino	showers,	or	bird	migrations,	or	tides,	or	processes	inside	a	living	being,	or	dynamics	of	an	
ecosystem	are	means	by	which	designers	can	invite	nature	into	collaboration,	and	
the	invisible	patterns	they	capture	can	be	brought	into	the	realm	of	the	senses	in	
myriad	new	ways.?		” 6

She suggests that by marrying animism with a sense of poetics, we can tap the affor-
dances of ambient computing to invent new forms of pleasurable experience. We can 
change the world through delight. It’s an intriguing vision that encourages us to weave 
elements of magic, myth, emotion, and empathy into the tapestry of our future.

Fortunately, we can’t predict the future. We can barely forecast the weather. To pretend 
otherwise is an act of hubris, the greatest sin in the eyes of the ancient gods. It’s this 
uncertainty that makes Horace’s lyric poetry both tempting and timeless: Carpe diem 
quam minimum credula postero, or “Seize the day; trust tomorrow as little as you may.”

Delightfully, there’s no shortage of problems with search today. Even as we speculate 
about the Future with a capital F, Google is quietly figuring out how to disambiguate 
GM (General Motors or genetically modified). For every unsolved problem, there are 
countless instances in which we know the solution, but nobody has bothered to imple-
ment it. Discipline and attention to detail would go a long way toward improving the 
world of search. A heads-down focus on the tasks of today can often produce both 
pleasure and progress.

5 “The Coming Age of Magic,” by Mike Kuniavsky, available at www.orangecone.com/tm_etech_magic_0.3.pdf.
6 “Designed Animism,” by Brenda Laurel, available at www.tauzero.com/Brenda_Laurel/DesignedAnimism/ 

DesignedAnimism.html.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Experience Discovery 171

But we’d be remiss in our responsibility if we ignore the shadow of the future. We’re not 
simply in the business of designing experiences. We must also grasp the curious, collab-
orative challenge of experience discovery. By investing in exploratory research and ex-
perimental design, we can work with our users to discover and cocreate new products, 
inventive applications, and desirable experiences. This will require insight and foresight.

To make search better, we must embrace the genius of the AND. We must look to the 
center and the periphery. We must learn from fact and fiction. We must use compelling 
stories and colorful artifacts as our microscopes, telescopes, and kaleidoscopes. It’s not 
sufficient to adopt and adapt patterns. We must innovate. We must bring search to life. 
To accomplish these lofty goals, we must entertain both the present and the future.

Figure 6-11. The butterfly effect

In this adventure, we might employ the butterfly effect as a metaphorical bridge be-
tween tomorrow and today. The term derives from a short sci-fi story by Ray Bradbury 
in which a hunter from 2055 travels into the past on a prehistoric safari, accidentally kills 
a butterfly, and returns to find his present has been changed in subtle yet meaningful 
ways. The phrase was given new life by Edward Lorenz, a mathematician and meteorol-
ogist who pioneered chaos theory by discovering how sensitive dependence on initial 
conditions shapes weather patterns. He’s credited with the aphorism that the flap of 

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Chapter 6: Tangible Futures172

a butterfly’s wings in Brazil could set off a tornado in Texas.7 This fact, that little things 
make a big difference, governs all complex systems, and it certainly applies to search.

Our work helps people find the products, places, and information they need, and the 
data that makes a difference. As designers of applications for search and discovery, 
we shape the future of learning and literacy. Search plays a vital role in the curation of 
knowledge and the provocation of creativity. It’s poised to engage our senses and lift 
our spirits in ways we can barely imagine. It’s a topic both timely and timeless. Search 
is a core life activity, as ancient in its form as the trees and hills, and as our faces are. We 
must discover its patterns, and break them with intent. Let’s get flapping!

7 Due to Edward Lorenz’s discovery of strange attractors, their visual representation, which illustrates order under-
lying chaos (pictured in Figure 6-11), is known as a Lorenz butterfly.

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Recommended 
Reading

We hope you’ve 
enjoyed our book!

Be sure to visit us at:
http://searchpatterns.org  

You’ll find our 
illustrations, patterns, 
and examples.

Feel free to use them in 
your documents and 
presentations.

There’s also a list of 
articles, blogs, books, and 
websites about search and 
discovery.

Plus, there’s a forum for 
feedback and discussion.  
We’d love to hear from you!

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


autocomplete, 4, 61, 68, 71, 
82–86, 91, 102, 110, 
120, 124, 148

Answers.com, 84
desktop application, 83
Firefox, 83
Google, 83, 85
visual, 84
Yahoo!, 83
Yahoo! Mobile, 85

autosuggest, 4, 61
scoped search, 86
Yahoo!, 83

B
The Back of the Napkin, 42
Baidu Elderly Search, 145
Baidu for Kids, 145
BBC, 67
behavior, 51–80

interaction design, 62–66
cross-channel design, 66
mobile search, 63

patterns of, 52–61
Expand, 55
pogosticking, 59
Quit, 52
thrashing, 60

anatomy of search, 25–50
content, 36–38
context, 41–50
context of use, 28
creators, 39–40
engine, 33–36
interface, 29–32
search modes, 28
users, 26–29

Android mobiles, 169
Ann Arbor Library, 65
Answers.com, 84
antipatterns

pogosticking, 59
thrashing, 60

apophenia, 21
Apple

autosuggest, 4
interfaces, 65

Apple.com, 84
architecture, pattern 

language for, 22
Armstrong, Louis, 51
AroundMe, 77
artificial intelligence, 2, 23, 

162
Artist Rising, 55, 97
audience, 145–146
augmented reality (AR), 169
Au, Irene, 67

A
Aardvark, 151, 152
access control, 35
actionable results, 120–124

Digg, 122
Google, 122
mobile applications, 124
Yahoo!, 123

advanced search, 102–105
Flickr, 104
personalization, 105–110

Alexander, Christopher, 21, 
81, 130

alternate views, 72–74
Amazon, 37, 45, 69

adaptive facets, 46, 98
category match, 129
faceted navigation, 27
memory managers, 76
No Results, 54
pearl growing, 106
personalization, 107
Product Pages, 46
scoped search, 129
unified discovery, 127

Amazon Mobile, 99
Ambient Devices, 63, 64
Ambiently, 153

Index

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Index176

design
interaction, 62–66
principles of, 67–80

alternate views, 72–74
context of use, 80
direct manipulation, 

78–80
immediate response, 71
incremental construction, 

68
minimal disruption, 77
predictability, 74
progressive disclosure, 

69–71
recognition over recall, 

75–77
design patterns, 81–130

actionable results, 120–124
advanced search, 102–105
autocomplete, 82–86
best first, 86–91
faceted navigation, 95–102

scented widgets, 96
federated search, 91–94
pagination, 110–116
structured results, 117–120
unified discovery, 125–130

desktop search, 16
Digg, 122

actionable results, 122
direct manipulation, 78–80
discovery engines, 131–154

audience, 145–146
categories, 132–138
format, 141–144
mode, 151–154
platforms, 147–151
topics, 139–141

diversity, 88
documents, 37
Dogear, 132
Dopplr, 85, 140, 141

C
categories, 132–138

and related terms, 
matching, 57

ChemSpider, 146
Cisco.com, 134, 135
Citysearch, 85, 134, 135
Cognition, 163, 164
collaboration, 13
collaborative filtering, 131
color

discovery of, 13–17
infinite colors of search, 16
Newton’s color wheel, 14
primary colors of search, 15

concept maps, 42, 43, 157
content, 36–38

ROT (redundant, outdated 
or trivial), 38

content management 
system, 44

context, 41–50
context of use, 28, 80
Cooliris, 59
Cooper, Alan, 147
Corbis, 160
Cover Flow, 28, 67, 147
cross-channel design, 66
CSA Illumina’s thesaurus 

browser, 56
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 51

D
Delicious, , 132, 141, 120
deliverables and methods, 

156–157
user experience 

deliverables, 157
demographics, 26

behavior (continued)
principles of design, 67–80

alternate views, 72–74
context of use, 80
direct manipulation, 

78–80
immediate response, 71
incremental construction, 

68
minimal disruption, 77
predictability, 74
progressive disclosure, 

69–71
recognition over recall, 

75–77
beliefs and principles, 20
Berners-Lee, Tim, 162
Best Bets, 89–91, 147
best first design pattern, 

86–91
diversity, 88
format, 88
Google, 87
personalization, 88
popularity, 88
relevance, 87
sorting by date, 88

Bloomberg, 75
books, 37
Boolean, 3, 35, 95, 99, 102
Boxee, 15, 94
Bradbury, Ray, 171
Braille output screen readers, 

73
browsing, 8, 17, 42, 45, 73, 

125
blending browse and 

search, 126
mobile, 77

butterfly effect, 171

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Index 177

personalization, 164
Similar link, 57, 153
snippets, 112
special query types, 5
structured results, 117

Google Desktop, 15, 147
Google Maps, 69–71
Google Mobile, 4–5, 108, 149, 

150
single-click phone and map 

features, 123
Google Public Data, 117
Google’s PageRank, 133
GoPubMed, 139
GoTo, 14
guided navigation (see 

faceted navigation)
guided summarization, 119

H
Hard Rock, 116
Home Depot, 128
Hulu, 15, 122
Hunch, 151, 152

I
IBM, 132

enterprise social search, 133
images, 15

seeking, 3
immediate response, 71
implementation (search 

engine), 35
incremental construction, 70, 

95, 159
infinite colors of search, 16
information visualization, 2, 

10, 23
inline paging, 114

filtering, 36, 37
sliders, 62

filters, 8, 68, 73, 88, 99, 106, 
110, 162

findability, 1, 6, 9, 11, 17, 20, 
38, 41, 44–48, 95

Firefox
autocomplete, 83

Five Ws (and one H), 31
Flickr, 3, 15, 38, 45–48, 46, 88, 

104
advanced search, 104
user model, 47

flock, 167
format, search by, 141–144
fragmentation, 41, 93
FriendChip™, 166
FriendFeed, 108
future possibilities, 155–172

experience discovery, 
168–172

methods and deliverables, 
156–157

search scenarios, 158–168

g
The Gap, 74
GazoPa, 104
Genentech, 102
Get Satisfaction, 140
Getty, 15
Gibson, William, 6, 21
Glass, Bryce, 47
Google, 2, 45

Accessible Search, 73
actionable results, 122
Amazon’s Product Pages, 46
autocomplete, 82, 83, 85
best first design pattern, 87
mobile voice search, 84
pagination, 110–111

E
EBSCO, 137, 138
Editor’s Choice, 89
Endeca’s guided 

summarization, 119
Endless.com, 114
enhancing understanding, 10
Epicurious, 139
Etsy, 104
Everyzing, 15
Evri, 12
Exalead, 103
Expand (pattern), 55
experience discovery, 

168–172
expertise types, 27

F
faceted navigation, 27, 29, 

36–38, 45, 55, 91–102, 
105, 110, 119, 120, 
125, 129, 137, 139, 116

Amazon, 98
Amazon Mobile, 99
Cisco, 135
Kayak, 100
LexisNexis, 138
library catalogs, 96
metadata, 97
scented widgets, 96
Volkswagen UK, 100

faceted search (see faceted 
navigation)

features (search engine), 35
federated search, 36, 45, 

91–94
Kosmix, 92
Library of Congress, 92

file formats (search engine), 
35

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Index178

mobile search interaction, 63
mobile voice search, 84
mode of discovery, 151–154
Modista, 143, 144
MrTaggy, 141, 142
multisensory search, 159
music, 15, 16

n
National Cancer Institute, 90
navigation and filtering, 36
NetFlix, 15, 78
Newssift, 118
Newton’s color wheel, 14
No Results, 53

o
objects, 38, 46–48
Olympic, 143, 166
oSkope, 141
Ovid, 131

P
pagination, 110–116

inline paging, 114
mobile pagination patterns, 

115
Pandora, 12, 28, 58, 155
paradox of the active user, 26
PARC, 142
Pascal, Blaise, 25
pattern language for 

architecture, 22
pattern recognition, 1–24

beliefs and principles, 20
discovery of colors, 13–17

l
Lands’ End, 60

blending browse and 
search, 126

Live Help, 127
large websites, 43
Last.fm, 12, 15, 58, 106
Laurel, Brenda, 155, 169, 170
Layar, 169
LexisNexis Academic, 137, 

138
library catalogs, 96
Library of Congress, 92, 93
Like.com, 15
linguistic toolset, 36
LinkedIn, 106, 143

query refinement, 144
social search, 107

Lorenz, Edward, 172

m
Mac OS X operating system, 

147
matching categories and 

related terms, 57
Mechanical Turk, 10
metadata, 97
methods and deliverables, 

156–157
user experience 

deliverables, 157
Metro Paris Subway, 169
Microsoft, 90

Bing, 110, 112
Midomi, 15, 104
minimal disruption, 77
mobile applications, 

actionable results, 124
mobile browsing, 77
mobile pagination patterns, 

115

innovation through 
collaboration, 13

integration, 35
interaction design, 62–66

cross-channel design, 66
mobile search, 63

interestingness, 131
interface, 29–32

query, 30
results, 30

International Children’s 
Digital Library, 145

iPhone, 4, 5, 12, 15, 20, 28, 
59, 108, 123, 124, 139, 
149, 150, 160, 169

adaptive solutions, 80
Spotlight, 149

iTunes, 123
iTunes Genius, 58
iTunes Store, 147, 148

j
Jobs, Steve, 68

k
Kayak, 100, 101, 115
keywords, 3, 12, 13, 26, 37, 

53–55, 62, 87, 112, 
143, 70

kiosks, 150
Kroger, 151
Redbox, 151

Kipling, Rudyard, 30
knowledge management, 40
Knowledge Navigator, 162
Koogle, 145
Kosmix, 92
Kroger, 151
Krug, Steve, 159
Kuniavsky, Mike, 169, 170
Kurzweil, Ray, 162

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Index 179

beliefs and principles, 20
blending browse and 

search, 126
enhancing understanding, 

10
fast, 45
federated, 45
Five Ws (and one H), 31
infinite colors of, 16
joy of, 19
multisensory, 159
personalizing by location, 

109
poor, 19
primary colors of, 15
qualities of the searcher’s 

experience, 29
sadness of, 19
shareable search stacks, 

120
understanding, 3–13

search analytics, 36
Searchblog, 109
search box, 3–6
search engine, 33–36
search engine results page 

(SERP), 10, 31–32, 55, 
59

Searchme, 79, 120, 121
search modes, 28
search scenarios, 158–168

flock, 166, 167
searchvalence, 164
semantic singularity, 

160–164
sensorium, 158–160

search types, faceted 
navigation, 27

searchvalence, 164, 165
semantic agent, 162
semantic singularity, 160–164
Semantic Web, 2, 162
sensorium, 158–160

progressive disclosure, 
69–71

recognition over recall, 
75–77

progressive disclosure, 69–71
ProQuest, 137
psychographics, 26
PsycINFO database, 137, 138

Q
qualities of the searcher’s 

experience, 29
query, 30
Quit (pattern), 52

R
recognition over recall, 75–77
Recommended Results, 89
recommender systems, 12, 

58, 131
Redbox, 151
relevance, 2, 11, 27, 37, 87, 

88, 131, 133, 141, 154
tuning, 36

result customization, 114
results, 30
Roam, Dan, 42
ROT (redundant, outdated or 

trivial), 38

S
scented widgets, 96
search

advanced search design 
pattern, 102–105

anatomy of, 25–50
context of use, 28
search modes, 28
users, 26–29

elephant in the room, 
17–19

understanding search, 3–13
engine, 11–13
goal, 6–11
search box, 3–6

Pattern Recognition by 
William Gibson, 21

patterns of behavior, 52–61
Expand, 55
pogosticking, 59
Quit, 52
thrashing, 60

pearl growing, 57, 159
Amazon, 106

performance, 35
personalization, 2, 16, 37, 41, 

88, 102, 119, 120, 122, 
131, 164, 168

Amazon, 107
Google, 164
search by location, 109

platforms, 147–151
pogosticking, 59
PointCast, 14
popularity, 88

sort by title, 89
portal, 44, 44–48
preattentive variables, 67
precision versus recall, 26
predictability, 74
pricing model (search 

engine), 35
primary colors of search, 15
principles of design, 67–80

alternate views, 72–74
context of use, 80
direct manipulation, 78–80
immediate response, 71
incremental construction, 68
minimal disruption, 77
predictability, 74

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


Index180

w
Wales, Jimmy, 39
Washtenaw Community 

College, 133, 134
Watts, Alan, 41
web page, 37
websites, large, 43
Where, 77
widgets, scented, 96
Wikipedia, 39, 45, 125
Wikitude, 169
Winchester Mystery House, 

41–42, 45
WineM, 66
Wolfram Alpha, 118, 163

y
Yahoo!

actionable results, 123
autocomplete, 61, 82

autosuggest and, 61, 82
mobile voice search, 84
pattern library, 23

Yahoo! Glue Pages, 125
Yahoo! Mobile, 85
Yahoo! Search Pad, 120
Yahoo! Shopping, 114
Yale University, 53
Yelp Monocle, 169

z
zooming user interface (ZUI), 

115

TweetDeck, 136
Twitter, 1, 3, 10, 14, 107, 134, 

136, 151, 168
social searches, 108

U
understanding search, 3–13
unified discovery, 125–130

Amazon, 127
Google, 125
Home Depot, 128
Wikipedia, 125

Urbanspoon, 140
usability, 156
user experience deliverables, 

157
users, 26–29

demographics, 26
expertise types, 27
paradox of the active user, 

26
precision versus recall, 26
psychographics, 26
technographics, 26

v
vendor credentials, 35
video, 15
Viewzi, 72
visual autocomplete, 84
visual facet widgets, 118
Volkswagen UK, 100

shareable search stacks, 120
similar sensewheel, 158
The Singularity Is Near, 162
snippets, 112

diversity, 113
Songza, 15, 79
sorting by date, 88
speed, 36
Spotlight, 147

iPhone, 149
Spotlight Search, 123
Sterling, Bruce, 1
structured results, 117–120

Endeca’s guided 
summarization, 119

Google, 117
Wolfram Alpha, 118

StumbleUpon, 153, 154
Suggested Links, 89
synesthesia, 13
system architecture, 35

T
technographics, 26
text-to-speech, 73
The Timeless Way of Building, 

21
ThingM, 66
thrashing, 60
title, sort by, 89
TiVo, 148, 149
topics, 139–141
Triangle Research Libraries, 

71
Twain, Mark, 23

www.it-ebooks.info

http://www.it-ebooks.info/


ABoUT THE AUTHoRS
Peter Morville is best known as a founder of the field of information archi-
tecture. His bestselling books include Information Architecture for the World 
Wide Web and Ambient Findability (both O’Reilly). He advises such clients as 
AT&T, Harvard, IBM, the Library of Congress, Microsoft, the National Cancer 
Institute, Vodafone, and the Weather Channel; and delivers keynotes and 
workshops at conferences around the world. His pioneering work on experi-
ence strategy and the future of search has been covered by Business Week, 
the Economist, Fortune, NPR, and the Wall Street Journal. Peter lives in Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, with his wife, two daughters, and a dog named Knowsy. You 
can reach him by email at morville@semanticstudios.com. You can also find him 
online at semanticstudios.com, findability.org, and searchpatterns.org.

Jeff Callender is vice president and design director of Q LTD, a strategic 
design consultancy with a global reach. Jeff is focused on bringing clarity to 
everyday graphic communications that promote positive user experiences. 
His wide body of work includes design for brand identity, user interface, print 
collateral, packaging, tradeshow, and exhibit graphics for a variety of clients 
including AT&T, Converse, Dow, NuStep, Jensen, ProQuest, and SIGGRAPH. 
Jeff has taught graphic design at the University of Michigan and lectured 
at its Stephen M. Ross School of Business and the SIGGRAPH Conference on 
Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques.

ColoPHon
The image on the cover of Search Patterns is a Charaxes brutus, or white-
barred charaxes, a butterfly of the Nymphalidae family. Native to Africa, the 
white-barred charaxes is a favorite of collectors due to the intricate, colorful 
patterns on the undersides of its wings. The butterfly is black with a broad 
white band on both sides of its wings, as its name implies.

Aided by a large wingspan of 8–10 centimeters, Charaxes brutus is one of the 
fastest butterflies in the world, capable of reaching speeds of up to 40 miles per 
hour. Its speed, coupled with the fact that it prefers densely wooded areas and 
flies high in the tree canopy, has traditionally made it a difficult species to catch.

In Africa, harvesting wild butterflies is a lucrative field; profits from a rare 
specimen can support an entire family. Using screen traps with baits of dung 
and fermented fruit, harvesters can lure this elusive butterfly to them and en-
trap it. While mounted specimens are commercially available, butterfly con-
servancies afford people the opportunity to view this impressive species live.

The cover image is from the Dover Pictorial Archive. The cover font is Adobe 
ITC Garamond. The text and heading font is Myriad Pro.

www.it-ebooks.info

v@v
Text Box
Download at WoweBook.com

http://www.it-ebooks.info/

	Preface
	Chapter 1: Pattern Recognition
	Understanding Search
	The Box
	The Goal
	The Engine

	The Discovery of Color
	Elephant in the Room
	A Mapmaker’s Manifesto
	Apophenia Redux

	Chapter 2: The Anatomy of Search
	Users
	Interface
	Engine
	Content
	Creators
	Context
	Portal
	Search
	Objects
	All Together Now


	Chapter 3: Behavior
	Patterns of Behavior
	Elements of Interaction
	Principles of Design
	Incremental Construction
	Progressive Disclosure
	Immediate Response
	Alternate Views
	Predictability
	Recognition Over Recall
	Minimal Disruption
	Direct Manipulation
	Context of Use


	Chapter 4: Design Patterns
	Autocomplete
	Best First
	Federated Search
	Faceted Navigation
	Advanced Search
	Personalization
	Pagination
	Structured Results
	Actionable Results
	Unified Discovery
	The End of the Beginning

	Chapter 5: Engines of Discovery
	Category
	Topic
	Format
	Audience
	Platform
	Mode

	Chapter 6: Tangible Futures
	Methods and Deliverables
	Search Scenarios
	Sensorium
	Semantic Singularity
	Searchvalence
	Flock

	Experience Discovery

	Recommended Reading
	Index



